# How To Know A Person By David Brooks
afterthought

Oh, how one wished one read this book earlier in 2017 or 2018. But hey, the book wasn't even published at that time. People had been figuring out with their lives, getting to know each other, pushing forward, or just stopping and look around. Plus, one was young, and one didn't read a lot of books; at least not as much as one did since last year December; so it's a wonder whether one'll had read the book and understood it or not. Even if one understood it, the wisdom to apply knowledge isn't yet sufficiently mature. Just because one read a book doesn't mean one really could put it into practice. But at least, one is grateful -- there are some overlapping with some books one read in the past, and that's grateful to know. What's what, is to recall oneself, after one has forgotten quite a lot of what one learnt, at least consciously. 

As a talkative person, it had been hard for one to stop speaking and start listening. That's history. Nowadays, while one can listen, it's mostly patience that needs practicing, at least from one's point of view. Yet, that's not enough. Listening itself doesn't mean one can put oneself in their shoes, align one's feelings with their feelings as close as possible, and many more. Plus, one of history's mistake is **time**. The time is nigh, you know. A year or two might as well be nothing. And a year or two is barely enough to open a door when both person are willing to open up; what says those unwilling to open, those unwilling to connect! To let them feel seen, feel valued, feel heard, and feel understood -- that takes time. And a year or two isn't sufficient, unless both of you are willing to open up! 

That's the clash of interest -- while one feel one want to take time connecting with other people, one had this lack of patience that one needs to train to let it bear into fruit -- but at that time, one was in university, and the pressing issue of ending university and going home means one would never return to the face to face again; and the time one'll stay in the country is 3 years, if not for Covid. 3 years, minus the time to know each other, to find each other, to find time to be with each other, talk with each other, activities with each other, amidst all the burdensome classwork, homework, coursework, etc. Three years! Might as well be nothing. 

Plus, one'd been lucky. Really, really lucky. Books said that many people speak their stuffs and don't care about what you speak. Yes, one do meet these types; but one'd been lucky to know that, quite as many actually _do_ listen to other people speaking. How attentive they are is of question; but that's okay -- just the willingness to not cut you halfway while you speak and let you finish your sentence is something one felt grateful for! To be more than that requires practicing, or be one of the rare person who could do it from the start, perhaps because their parents (or guardians or teachers) are attentive listeners and they learnt from them how to be attentive listeners. Otherwise, you just had to practice. 

Stereotype, too indulged in self, thinking others too stupid to speak to; these are a few from the list author provided to **not** see a person. Ultimately they blinds you. If your parents are one that, say, enforced stereotypes, you'd had a hard time trying to look past them. It'll take time, but eventually, if you separate from your parents for a year or two, you'd have time to disjoint yourself from their stereotypical influence and carve your view strong enough to not let them influence you, at least in terms of stereotypes. 

One thing author mentioned is "active curiosity." And at the end, he mentioned a quiet person like him can't make that happen too often. For one, one had difficulty doing that too -- especially eye contact. **If one's not looking at the floor (hence shut down one's vision receptors), one had trouble listening to others.** It seems like one could only use one sense at a time -- to listen attentively to others, one had to point one's ears at them rather than look at them. Better, close one's eyes so one could concentrate on their tone. One used to read from some email by Kat Vellos, which one can't remember which it is, that she said, unlike what we'd been anticipating, it's not body language that transfer most of the communication information, but vocal. One guess that's probably an excuse, but you get what one meant. The ability to receive information from your eyes and your ears in parallel is a rare skill. The ability to receive them and to remember them is also a rare skill (ask me a few days later what we'd talked about some small stuff, one'd probably forgotten it, like what's your occupation that kind of stuff, unless one participated with you, or unless you repeated it to me dozens of times over a period of months, then probably one can remember.) One had used one's brain specifically only to remember the deeper moments, where one had concentrated a lot; and at other times, one'd probably slack off in energy-conservation mode. 

Accompaniment. Easier said than done. Actually, one'd asked if people are willing to accompany one, but no, they're not willing. That's perhaps one wrong way to do it; or perhaps, one'd just been unlucky asking the wrong person; or perhaps timing was inaccurate, one don't know. It's not like you could actively accompanying someone -- both of you had to make time for each other's interference into your life, accept their accompaniment, then only it works. But don't stop there -- you could be accompanying your colleagues in the same office room without any deepening of feelings. That's because both of you are doing your work independently without any attention on each other, being sensitive to each other, and unhurried by life's pace. Author spoke of 4 qualities: patience, playfulness, other-centeredness, and (being) presence. Going for a walk together, going for a hike together, away from your phone or book or whatever that pulls your attention; attentive to nature, the environment, and how the environment pulls you both (or more than 'both') together. 

"Don't fear the pause." That's actually a useful advice. Actually, one never really fear pausing with someone; the fear came from how awkwardness turns into quitting. Someone else whom fear the pause will not necessarily fill the void with sentences, questions, or whatever. Instead, they'll said, "OK, that's about it. One's out of things to say, let's go." Especially if you're sitting in a coffee shop rather than, say, on a hiking trip which locks you into something where you can't leave immediately unless you exit the hiking and change plans. If you're like one whom love the others to accompany one in silence for a prolonged period of time, that'd made one feel sad. Ask: why can't we just sit down for a prolonged period of time, to experience each other presence, in the moment, without talking about anything, without doing anything? 

Don't say "I know exactly what you mean." That's another good advice! Actually, one fell into the trap; not until author reminded one, one won't know that puts people off. Something that they can speak of become a one-man show (and one's that 'one-man', oh dear). Instead, just listen and keep asking questions until it's extremely clear what they felt. It won't be exactly the same; the problem lies in 2 ways -- first, your conscious mind can't understand fully what your unconscious and subconscious are feeling; second, words, vocal, and body language combine can't articulate thoughts with 100% efficiency. After passing through the message two ways, you'd loss some of the meaning to it. But just as much as possible, that's rare -- plus, you don't need 100% transferrance to felt understood by someone else. 

There was a question that was mentioned in Filters Against Folly, called the ecologist question, "And then what?" Author encouraged that same question, by adding a 'happened' to the back of 'what' (And then what happened?), when you're asking for narratives. One think that was great! You don't need to think of how to rephrase questions you want to ask, how to dampen your speech so to not hurt other people's feelings, or sometimes, rephrasing after rephrasing just to get through to the other person. If you got the other person to tell a story, "And then what happened?" is a no-brainer question that don't take up computing power; and that extra freed computing power you could use for listening! 

Of course, that can't account for all questions. Other open-ended questions usually (probably with exceptions) starts with: 
- **How did you...**
- **What's it like...**
- **Tell me about...**
- **In what ways...**
And when the timing is right, you could ask _big_ questions: those that're truly memorable (but which you can't abuse because people don't make big decisions every day, so they don't have big answers for you all the time).

Here are some sentences one picked from the chapters (with or without rephrasing): 
- Educators who had once prided themselves on their ability to reshape character now paid more attention to the SAT scores of their students, and middle-class parents scrambled to find schools that would give their children the best chances to qualify for elite colleges and universities. 
- Parents started practicing "acceptance parenting." They were less inclined to mold their children's moral lives, and more likely to cheer them on for their academic and athletic achievements. 
- Hard conversations means conversations across differences and across perceived power inequalities. 
- Prior to entering into any hard conversation, it's important to think about conditions before you think about content. 
- Curiosity is the ability to explore something even in stressful and difficult circumstances. 
- Respect is like air; when it's present, nobody notices; but when it's absent, it's all anybody can think about. 
- There's no way to make hard conversations un-hard.
- When you tell a depressed person how they can get better, the only message you convey is "you don't get it."
- A friend's job in these circumstances is not to cheer the person up. It's to acknowledge the reality of the situation; it's to hear, respect, and love them; it's to show them you haven't given up on them, you haven't walked away.
- "What I really need is for someone to get down on the ground with me."
- To know a person well, you have to know who they were before they suffered their losses and how they remade their whole outlook after them. 
- 90% of what we call writing is actually reading. It's going back over your work so you can change and improve it. 

Ok, one actually don't know that the INTP ENFP thingy, Myers-Briggs, wasn't accurate. Taking it twice and you're likely to get different results, esp. if most of what you chose is in the middle (because it depends on situations how one chose to act!) Author suggests Big Five instead. Regardless, one want to mention that these personalities aren't fixed. You could call one an introvert-extrovert: one is originally an introvert, and when working, one prefer to be an introvert, undisturbed by others, having quiet time for oneself to think through the problem. In other times, one prefer to go all out and reach out to others, to listen to what they have to say, or to chat, or whatever that connects us together, sharing of an activity while chatting, or chatting over a coffee, preferably one to one because one can't focus on two person at the same time, nor can one confirm that the two person in front of one don't leave one out and chat among themselves. You may be tempting to say that's not being a team player; in fact, one don't think there's anything wrong with that! Being a team player means just playing well with a team rather than bringing up problems and anger all the time -- so long as one can communicate, join in a discussion that make sure one can get involved rather than 'kick you out', there's no problem with that. That's a team player. 

Ok, that's a diversion. Back to topic, by introvert-extrovert one means, even if you're an introvert, that doesn't mean you can't be an extrovert simultaneously. It's not necessarily to change; though if you want to, you could, over several years, change your personality until it become second nature. However, it's possible to retain both personalities at the same time and had two different face in different situations. In fact, that's being flexible and adapting to the situation as it needed. If your friends said that you're not being true to yourselves, they just allowed you to show your true self to them, and allow you to attend to them when they need it. 

"Oh, what if one's putting up a face?" You'd asked. Nope. You just attend to what they need -- when they need you, you attend to them. When they don't need you, just act normally, act yourself. Attending to someone isn't a second nature -- it requires practicing. That said, some people had parenting/coaching that made it their second nature, and they naturally don't like to be alone. That's okay, though, different people had different preference. For the introverts, you can be extrovert for a few hours a week and you don't need to change yourself to become extrovert; how's that sound? 

Life tasks is interesting. A few years ago, one's life task was maximize making friends. OK, that's vague, and it sure is. Due to its vagueness, it had only somewhat been successful, as one aim and changed directions. The problem is, how does one even define one's problem when there's no way one could understand oneself until putting oneself out there? While they're to shape one's directions, they're to shape one's problems too, to see it more clearly and know what's actually at the root. During that time, one always tried to apply what one read in books to real life; alas, most unsuccessfully because they need people to go into some hassle (i.e. commitments), and people aren't willing to commit. They just want to play during the good times, and leave during the bad times. Not to say all would do that, but at least, one had been bad at finding the person whom aligned their interest with one so we could befriend each other. 

It's not always a good start. Focusing on making friends because one understood that friends are those whom will walk with you to oblivion, till your death, and not your work, means one slacked off in looking for career during one's earlier stage of life. Why go out and look for work when one haven't solved one's own friendship crisis? And even if one found work, one's own worries would swamp one out, unable to focus; and utmostly it would cause regret that sunk deeper and deeper, to never used the time 'properly' in solving the root problem, rather using work as an escape. The problem lies when it shapes one's personality, where even if one had found it, one'd find it difficult to persevere in job search. Job itself is OK, but job search, urgh!!! You know how frustrating it is if you tried yourself, rejections after rejections for either unknown reasons or silly reasonings! You can define how silly it is yourself. 

The really mind-blowing thing mentioned in the book is: "_Human beings are works in progress that mistakenly think they're finished._" Yeah, life tasks never ends. You might temporarily put it off, but if you don't tend to it regularly, it'll slack off, and you may even fall back to where you were before! 

As for why not talk with other people on a train, author said we don't start conversations because we're bad at predicting how much we'll enjoy them. One can't say one totally agree with the sentence. For example, if one put down one's phone/book and saw others on their phone, it's difficult for one to interrupt them and start a conversation, given that ones's culture states that it's bad to disturb someone who's doing something (esp. if you talk to someone who's talking to another person, that's disrespectful) unless emergency. That's one reason. If we clear that, there's another barrier to overcome, more of a me-problem rather than the world-problem, that is **nervousness**. To do something that you'd not used to do, your brain unconsciously tell you it's bad, even if it's not. 

Here are some more extras on nudging for storytelling: 
- Instead of asking, "_What_ do you think about X?", ask, "**_How did you come to believe_** X?"
- Don't ask people to tell you about their values, but "Tell me about the person who shaped your values most."
- Or you could ask questions that take people back in time, or ahead of time. 

While we want to be seen individually, nonetheless, we can't detach from our groups. Culture shaped us a lot. 

> _Wisdom is knowing about people. Wisdom is the ability to see deeply into who people are and how they should move in the complex situation of life._

(Taken from a fragment inside the book, not rephrased) Author believe wise people don't tell us what to do; they start by witnessing our story. They take in our story, accept it, but push you to clarify what it is that you really want, or to name the baggage you left out of your clean tale. This help us process our own thoughts and emotions. They receive what we send. 

> _The wise are those who've lived full, varied lives, and reflected deeply on what they've been through._

- Successful friendship will challenge (but not too aggressively). 
- The wise will be there to stand up for the actual truth, to call out what needs be, if one's hiding from some hard reality. To hear not only what's said but what's unsaid. 
- Wisdom isn't only a trait possessed by an individual; it's a _social skill_ practiced within a relationship or a system of relationships. 
- Don't try to manipulate by immediately jumping to (judging) conclusions: "_That's stupid_," or "_That's right_." Instead, pause and consider what the meaning of the statement is to the person who said it. 


### Footnotes: 
1. One took insight from Xenoblade Chronicles 3, when Mio said, "Still, it's 2 months; might as well be nothing!"
2. Actually, author mentioned don't put yourself in their shoes. Despite one put it above, you actually should listen to the author than one. Don't put yourself in their shoes; instead, listen to what they had to offer! 