# Three Questions By Ken Fisher
afterthought

The book is a non-fiction on practical investment with scientific investigations. The whole book is about using the 3 (scientific) Questions to direct your investment decisions. 

The first part of the book mentioned the 3 questions: What is it that you know others don't? What is it that you can understand (fathom) that others cannot? (I.e. if you try to explain something to them that they can't fathom, you'll see them scratching their head no matter how hard you try -- and that's when you know you understood something others don't). And what is our primitive lizard/emotional brain doing to us that prevent us from rationally and logically invest? 

The second part of the book speaks of various examples to support such three questions, by giving examples from different sectors. It first told us to develop new "capital markets technology" which others yet not know/understand to take advantage of; these are like some correlation or equation or flow of supply and demand that we can see and others can't. Then, there are a few examples that debunk some myth we hold, whether they have no relationship whatsoever, or the relationship is the other way round (like US had low debt compared to GDP, but we who see it in absolute value thought it's big. Not to say it's always wrong to see it that way -- if you're trying to persuade someone to take action for climate change, it's better to see it the 'wrong way' as people will feel scared and take action than push it aside and wait for it to explode in the future; just in Investment, that's not how you do it). Author also told us that the market is influence by just supply and demand, and no others. Of course, our psychology is what causes supply and demand, so down the line, our psychology is influenced by a lot of stuffs, like Presidential election (e.g. one didn't linked Donald Trump to his like of Bitcoin just after his ears got shot earlier, so when he's elected President, one didn't manage to link his like of Bitcoin earlier to his like of Bitcoin now; plus, it's a loss of uncertainty after the presidential election, so people started going crazy buying). And author showed us how the market played with our emotions with examples from bear markets. 

The problems author is trying to solve is our blind belief of myth, and that we thought investment is an art when it's a science. Even though the science is simple (using correlation and $R^2$ mostly, though not restricted to that only), it's ultimately science. Art used to be a technology, until they stopped working (because it's so well known it's been priced in). Today, we need science to know stuff that others don't. If we just heritage the old art (or science, like price-to-book ratio, which was a science), we wouldn't have knew more than others, so if you don't, follow your benchmark! Just by an index if you're poor (most of you will be; after all, not a lot of people can put in 6 digit to invest, as a percentage to the total no. of people in this world; otherwise, you'll know who you are if you don't need to loan/scholarship to pay for university tuition fees!!!)

It's not without a problem. The correlation one had tried to do it oneself, but one found quite a number of correlation with stock prices, esp. the TTM of Total Revenue. But it's no use; because the correlation is **"reflective"**, not "_predictive_". That is, if there is a drop in price, and we move the window a step back (one quarter back) so to use Q2 2024's Total Revenue (TTM) to predict Q3 2024's stock price, we might find the prediction is going up, but the stock price going down. Then, since we now know the stock price going down, taking Q3 2024's Total Revenue (TTM) to predict Q4 2024's stock price, it'll predict going down. The stock price first go down, and you only 'predict' it 3 months later. That's why one said it's reflective, not predictive. The total revenue can only be used to predict the time the number is written down (that's even before it's being submitted to SEC), but not of the future. It 'reflects' the present stock price, but could not 'predict' the future stock price. Finding a capital tech to predict the future 70% or more accurately, is very hard. In fact, one don't know yet anything that you already know. 

[Find me at Upwork](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 