# Wanderlust by Rebecca Solnit
afterthought

There's something in Chapter 8 that kept one thinking for long. It's about author mentioned how some author cannot resist the "how", to teach the reader 'how' to walk, describing under it what to think of, what to notice, what to do, etc. And that keeps one thinking, if there are more books on 'how', which 'how' do one want to ignore, and which 'how' do one want to listen to? 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

If, in walking, we can reject the 'how' of the author by saying, "this is none of your business. One walk how one like/love to walk, and you shouldn't prevent one from walking one's way, even just mentally," what about other aspects? Are there other aspects that we could use the same argument, to not listen to the how? And in what sense do we listen to the how? I.e. in what area do we _want_ to listen to the 'how'? 

One don't have an answer to that. Seriously speaking, 'how' is a way of understanding the problem stated from the author's perspective. If the author says how he walks, we reading it means we shouldn't learn how he walks, but just to understand how he thought he walks (and 'he' here includes female, just to make it consistent one'll use 'he' than (s)he). We could have our taste, our way of walking. And for one, if it's something one think one don't know about, like there's a book called _How to Read a Book_ by Mortimer Adler, it's worth reading. One hadn't read that book yet, but it's worth learning from him how he read a book, and see (and really try) how his way of reading beats one's way of reading. So far, one read more casually than seriously, for the latter usually result in quick headache, while the former can last throughout the day, meaning little brain exertion, probably. In this case, one's interested in learning what author Mortimer Adler had to teach and learn from him. On the other hand, walking is what one decide to leave the 'how' to oneself, prefering the author to describe the 'why' and the 'what', to share his/her perspective and understand rather than teach me 'how' to do these stuff -- no originality. 

Chapter 14 leaves a deep impression on one, for she explained why there weren't many females going out on a walk in the past. It spoke with such imaginative power, of the extremely high possibility of rape, and the law legalizes raping for stupid reasons (i.e. merely _suspecting_ something to be true rather than having supports for their guesses), now made clear why the past 2 centuries people want to revolutionize the world: women suffrage being just one of them (besides Gandhi and the others for other causes). The world was in such a mess, at least in terms of fairness, that our ancestors just a few generations ago were forced to close in the gap and lay down the bricks for basic human rights. The important thing is to learn this part of history, not as someone whom sees that it had passed, and hence felt like a pond being thrown a small pebble; but to remember that, if it hadn't been for our ancestors, the things that we so often taken for granted today, our human rights, would not be possible. The world would have been much worse. 

One could reason for the world isn't much better today -- economic had been largely unfair. The thing is, the world could never be fair; we could close the gap, but never eliminating the gap. Capitalist only survives on competition, and without a gap, why would people compete? They know that, if they're 'successful' on the competition, they'd go up in ranks and have the benefit. If they don't have the benefit, why even compete? Plus, a world without competition, while serene, wouldn't work. While one agrees that today's competition got overkill (people being too focused on work and climbing the ladder), some level of competition ensures the sharpness of our teeth and fangs and claws, and ensure we don't get boring. You know, heaven is the place where things get the most boring, because it's too serene, unchanging. Change is the only constant. So, we would always have gaps; just that, the gap perhaps change its field/discipline, in some field that we're more acceptable to compete on (for money) than something less acceptable (forced rape for fun). 

And for us, the rape thing and all these are unacceptable to our standards; they make us angry. But they're only making one angry, not vomiting yet. The vomiting part goes back to a more ancient era, during the hunter tribe status, that, if an old human dies, they want themselves to be eaten by the rest of their tribe. OK, swallow back your vomit for now until we finish the story. In the old days, human, with their weak arms and legs (ours are weaker, but theirs, despite strong, couldn't compare to other animals like tigers and lions and elephants), couldn't always get enough food. Only with the cooperation of a few clans together could they fell a giant mammoth (and hence, the giant faunas went extinct, if they kill yearly, because their birth rate are slower than death rate). On other days, they had to make do. A dead body is a supply of energy, and they can't waste that. And here we are, dealing with obesity nowadays!!! Just how much had the world changed during these period. (Reference on the story, **excluding the explanation**, on _The Story of Civilization, Book 1_, by Will and Ariel Durant). 

---

Basically, the book speaks of the various kind of walking you can do. There's walking out in the open, in nature, and its history, including as a pilgrimage, or perhaps the maze in a garden that get you lost within; for some, that includes walking to think about something, though that thinking could be walking long distance where no space you land is the same plot of land you'd walked before, or it could be pacing back and forth in a room. Though, one personally preferred outside, due to the fresh air (providing you're living not in highly-polluted city, of course); it feels like jailed air inside the room. Even the memory palace popularized in Sherlock Holmes involves walking (and yes, the memory palace is a real thing used by ancient people before they record large no. of info down on paper or papyrus or bamboo sticks or rock or whatever). 

Then, author brought us, after going through the histories and change in reasoning of why to walk (for pleasure, or only for traveling to a destination, or whatever reasonings), to more histories not of walking but that affects walking. This includes the claiming of public land private, reducing less land for walking, often fragmenting is (for there's either no way to cross, or have to go around a big round). And she spoke of the different cultures and laws, like trespassing was hardly a concept in Russia (and/or in Britain?) because private property wasn't absolute. In Britain nowadays, when one was studying there, you can cross private fields where animal grazes; they left doors for hikers and walkers to cross the field without going around. Not sure if that's law or something. But of course, there's a time, someone built a house and own a lawn in some empty places surrounded by forest, and the walk leader suggests there's a rights of way there, and we decide to go inside the lawn. The owner, sitting on the sofa watching TV in the glass-covered wall house, saw us and his adrenaline immediately pumped up, as if he's gonna pull out a shotgun and aim at us anytime (though, it seems like Britain don't have as much guns owned by the residents as the US does? One don't know.) Seeing his reaction, we backed out of course, and he came out to warn us, of course. We just go trailed along his gate beside and continued on our way thereafter. 

Next came the city: even the city is walkable, though for different reasons. The streets are public, and they serve different purposes. People who live by the street could be homeless, beggars, courtesans, etc. And author focused particularly on Paris, devoting a whole chapter to it; because it was the home for many revolutions happening on Paris, and most of them happen via marching on the streets. That way gradually spread to other countries, and so we have "strike" today as walking down a street. Success or not, they are walking. As for women, we spoke already about rape above that prevented them from going out, or be treated as prostitute; even so, they have to go out at the right time. In a world where women and children were treated as objects, with their rights fully of the husband or father, and where selling their children is legal, and offering their wife to be slept by the travelers who would have a night at the house before continuing their journey is zeal, it's no wonder we haven't heard much from them; the rare appearance signified courage and bravery, a Diogenes living outside the society's norm. 

Then, author touches the Industrial Revolution, which separate us from caste and villages into suburbia -- when things go private and no larger than a nuclear family living together, when one house and another house were separated by gates, forming a gated community; and nowadays, everyone just stay inside their house willingly getting themselves distracted by social media and almost never see their face outside (and inside a car is not considered outside), or their face is outside where neighbors cannot see (at their workplace kilometers from where they live, for example, or at supermarkets and other stores and restaurants and etc.), it's no wonder walking becomes difficult. Everyone is gating you from walking and trespassing. And as the community became more dangerous, without everyone looking after one another, children easily become prey to children capturers and sellers, they were now kept at home for prolonged period. Walking to school is not a deal; they lived too far to go, and the neighborhood too dangerous to let them walk themselves to school. For God sake, one isn't sure if burglars and bandits attacked a children before in the past; but nowadays, if you walk in a no-people-filled street, you're quite doomed. Even adults like one, male, is quite scared walking in the empty streets sometimes. It's time to learn some REAL Kung Fu and bring a stick always with you! Because the places are more traveled by cars, and more places not within walking distance (i.e. not something that takes less than 30 minutes to arrive by leg), and more people preferred parking in front of the door than walk extra 30 seconds, we see less and less walking, esp. in countries where walking isn't encouraged (like my country, where sidewalk is almost nil, and where it had, it stretches only a small part of the road, mostly just to look nice). 

Then, author introduces the walking-to-nowhere machine: the treadmill. When we are devoid of walking, and walking take on the new reason to "stay healthy", the treadmill originally for prisoners (perhaps to generate electricity via human-hamster) became widespread. The funny thing is, a treadmill should be used to generate electricity, like a dynamo attached to it, powered by our legs; now, you put in power to make it run, so it could "encourage" you to walk rather than you standing there and felt no pressure, felt no encouragement, felt full of procrastination, and just look at your phone standing, plus without a warden beside to beat your ass with a stick and ask you to go faster and faster and faster (as one imagined with the prison situation, though that's one's **guess**, not what one read on). We voluntarily torture ourselves for the sake of healthiness, because we no longer live a healthy lifestyle that need the use of our legs. 

Then, there was a topic about walking as an art. To be honest, one didn't really understood this topic, but it kinds says that, a picture taken by a camera, because it didn't take time, isn't a process. A similar picture drawn by an artist by hand, because it take time, had a context in it. Then, some artists found some way to make "motion pictures" (**NOT GIF, NOT VIDEO!!!**), like making pictures while walking or something, or a fisheye view of a single point that allows one to gaze at any direction, or something else, that signifies walking? One don't really understand the relationship between walking and art on this chapter XVI. 

And the final chapter spoke about Las Vegas, how it had grew from an empty space with few settlers to a City, and in the process of "modernization", the loss of the rights of way, or at least, squeezed. Do we still travel? 

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 