# How to do Nothing by Jenny Odell
afterthought

To be honest, the title really suggests of "how to do nothing", and one really thought "nothing" really means "nothing". But it seems like one got the term wrong. "Nothing" here is defined as "not performing actions that forward progress", and 'progress' in the definition is how we define 'progress' in the 21st century, in work, in life, by our (Western) social norm. You still do something than let your body rot, but relative to progress, it's nothing. 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

Author starts off with the "attention economy" that rob our attention from us, and we are to reclaim our attention from them. Some of my friends deny using social media for that reason, but as author suggests, that does not work, because social media aren't the only things that claim our attention; everywhere on the internet is. One isn't too sure about outside the internet like adverts and stuffs, and perhaps we could include TVs and perhaps radios too, one don't know; but just the Internet itself, it's a "virtual reality" created for us to live in. Engaging with the internet means uploading our brain to it and voilà, welcome to Eden. And because Eden is Eden the heaven, and heaven is helluva boring place to live, with "nothing to do every day", or "a constant torture to live in pleasure for an infinite period of time, with no aim, with no goals, with nothing to please". If God don't take away our feeling of boringness, heaven is boring, one can assure you. Back to our topic, Internet is kind of a heaven; just that it's created by humans. And to get our attention for as long as possible, it experimented a lot on how to hold our attention to it. Why our attention? If you only look one eye on something, you probably wouldn't buy what it tries to sell you; but if it can keep you there, you probably change your mind. And when everyone tries to sell you something, it formed the attention economy. 

The thing is, we defined productivity, we defined usefulness (of our actions, our work); but what are they relative to? Maybe some work seems useful, but to nature, they're nothing. For example, launching rockets into space seems useful from the perspective of human, because it helps to satiate our curiosity, it helps to satiate our greediness to conquer (not enough land, let's go conquer space!), it helps to satiate our definition of 'progress' (yeah, so let's see how far can our rocket travels, and beat the Guinness World Record for it; or perhaps, the farthest manned rocket travel, or the fastest rocket travel, or reusability of the rocket, etc.). But Mother Nature looked at us like, snuff it, you don't even know what you're doing. All we are doing is to calm our heart, for if we don't have a goal to aim towards, we become agitated; and the goal could be anything, even if it means destroying nature. In Mother Nature's eye, she had only one goal for us: to stay alive until we reproduce offsprings, and we could die as we wish to. That's why she only maintain our body for so long; and the elderly no longer functions so well, because it's a waste of energy for maintaining a body not capable of reproducing, and maintenance requires a heck load of energy! 

And of course, author wants to strive to convince us, once we return our attention back to ourselves, what we can use that attention on. How long have you sat down patiently and read a book for hours? Or do anything that requires patience for hours? (Nope, watching TV does not count, for that's passive). How long have you not try to multitask, or to change task too constantly, and focus on something for a prolonged period of hours? Ever since one realized that _focus is what provides a calm mind_, one significantly reduces the number of times one change task. It's not like one could totally eliminate it, for changing task is addictive; but of course, one felt the withdrawal symptoms: headache (that's why people use painkillers a lot, or caffeine), a mumbled attention (trying to sit down to _refocus_ is a difficult task, because the heart cannot calm down once you started your day with task-switching), agitated (when you go through your to-do list in your head and realizes that all of it you don't want to do now, because you either lost interest temporarily in them so you don't have the heart to, or they require focus to do hence prolonged period of time, you just sat there and continued going up and down the list, asking yourself, "What am I going to do now? What can I do?"), and other that one may not have noticed. As for multitasking, ever since high school, one had abandoned it, and could no longer multitask. Actually, multitask means switching between task so fast it feels like multitasking; but nowadays, even task switching for me, one had to devote at least a few minutes to that task before one could switch. Not the best, for one want to switch every few hours, not every few minutes, so more improvement could be done. 

Now, before one continues, one shall summarize a bit. The book had two aims: 
1) To get us out of productivity, and 
2) To get our attention back. 

There's a 3rd point called "a movement downward into place" that author mentioned, but unfortunately, one cannot understand what that means. What place? What does it mean by "downward into place", go down to the place? Or perhaps, reverse course (anti-productivity)? Or what? And movement, is it a physical movement, a brain/mental movement, or a social movement (the first 2 types of movement concerns the individual, the 3rd concerns the public, where 'strike' is a subset of social movements). One don't know. 

And you know what, it's about **time.** 4000 weeks taught us we had limited time on Earth, and it continues to flow no matter what we are doing. The first thing author go against are flexible workday. For example, freelancing that allows you to get to work at any time of the day; that fragments your day, interrupts you. Let's explain. One afternoon, you're reading a book for the past 30 minutes, then suddenly, ding, a message pop up on Upwork/Fiverr/any other platforms. You check the thing, and now you have a work to do; you accept it, and you went to work with it. They're from a time zone behind you, asking if you could finish "today" (meaning, the client's 'today', not _your_ 'today'). You said, yes, sure, and went to work with it. By the time you finished it, you hand it to the client at their time 4 p.m. They thank you for it, pay you, and whoosh, another income done. You got up from your seat, looked at the time on your computer and say, what? It's 4 a.m. in the morning? Time to go to sleep. **You see the problem now?** If you don't, check if you have problem with yourself first, but let's state it to you. We non-nocturnal creatures usually go to sleep early in the night (say 9 pm) and wakes up early in the morning (says, 5 am); though, this changes depending on different culture, and some people in the hunter gathering tribe needs to look over the fire, needs to look out for animals approaching (patrolling), but all these take turns. Never do human (except nowaday workers, and worse, college students) go to sleep at 5 a.m. and think that's normal. My arse normal. Second, say you're not reading your book halfway, but you're having sex halfway, or perhaps having a heartfelt chat with your fiancé, and the 'ding' said you **MUST** do it now, and because people nowadays see themselves victim, that they cannot say no to their boss, they say, yeah OK let's continue our sex next time, how many minutes do one need to 'repay' you and for how long have we booked to have sex, is it 3 hours or something? Or quickly end the conversation with their fiancé hoping he/she would continue the conversation next time. As if real life thing are like YouTube video that could pause and resume! You see the problem? 

Then, author move on to digital detox. That means temporarily deactivate your social media account hoping it could let you not watch it so often. And perhaps, temporarily get disconnected to the internet. One tried it before when one was young, because at that time, almost no one would call one (except perhaps my Piano teacher, which one told her to call one's dad instead), so one could afford to do so for a week. No computer, no telephone, OK. Sealed them into the box and put them inside the store room, OK. Half work half not. From one's experience, detaching from other people don't feel good, because we're social animals (even if one's the one that text other people first than other people text me, and they probably wouldn't even notice if one don't text them because they have their busyness to deal with). Then, when we take ourselves off the world, we're actually escaping our supposed responsibility to participate in whatever is ours to do. You could retreat for a few days, yes, but to say forever? Not really, unless you really leave your responsibility behind hoping someone would pick it up in your stead, which is _irresponsible_. So, author suggests, as a replacement to long term escape, we should retreat in our mind than in the space (environment to the cabin). To give up responsibility is to let someone else be responsible for you, hence giving up your freedom to act. Yes, say you're an American retreating to the cabin. That means giving up your freedom to vote -- and how can you vote when you're in the cabin? And yes, it's not required to vote, you can suspend voting; but for the sake of the example, let's say you must vote. Then, if you're not to come out of your cabin, you would have to assign someone, perhaps your family or friends, to vote in your stead. What they vote will be their choice, not yours, because by the time you retreat, you hadn't know who the candidates are, so you can't tell them in advance. Or if you say you want them to vote for Democrats than Republican, and there are a few candidates, which one they would vote would also depend on them, for you can't guess who would be the candidates in the future. That's what it meant by giving up freedom. 

We'll skip more things from this article like "refusal-in-place", and "standing apart". That you shall read yourself. 

Then, author speaks of disturbing the norm. When other people filled their work time with distractions (when they have no work to do, or when they're bored, or for whatever reason), when you're the one that just sits there and do nothing, everyone would starts feeling guilty. My favorite metaphor here was with Diogenes, the guy who dare to disobey social norms at large, and disobeyed so much that people just treat him as an anti-social-norm and no longer feels to distracted by his weirdness. Though, when he did something they didn't understand, they still asked him, why did he do what he was doing 'now'? Then, there's a phrase by Bartleby that author like, called "_I would prefer not to._" Whatever requests that comes with us, we nowadays say yes, because we feel guilty to reject; but what if we replace "yes" with "I would prefer not to?" It's a dampening version of "no". When we're asked a question that defaults to yes or no, it takes work, and will, to keep answering something else. You just have to stay with the awkwardness. 

As for paying attention, when you pay attention to something, you had to stop paying attention to other things in the background. E.g. trying to listen to someone in a loud room, you had to ignore what other people are speaking in the background, especially if the MC is speaking on stage, you have to resist listening to the MC, instead listen to the person right in front of you. As for one, nowadays, when people ask me why one don't do this or that, or don't try this or that; well, some things are worth trying, but one don't have the attention. And that's what one reply them. People ask you, would you like to go and try the new route? Others answer, "no time", one answer, "not enough attention." Yeah OK, new route is to find out something new about the world, nothing wrong with that; but remember, we only have limited attention, so we could only try so many new things; it's preferably that you settle for a few things to mastery **and** try new things concurrently. So, that's what a generalist is like: a T-shaped 'profession', where mastery in depth of a few, and know the surface of many. (By the by, if you can't fathom what one meant, or what's the relationship between generalist and attention, one can just say, one can fathom something that you can't, a useful asset indeed! And if that's in investment, do tell one, because one just found a way to make money that everyone else can't take advantage because they can't understand something that seems so easy to one, and so one can take advantage of it as one don't have to worry the others learning it from me since they can't even understand it when placed in front of them clearly.)

After we withdraw our attention from the attention economy, we would need to put it somewhere. Attention in our brain not focused somewhere would wander to whatever that interest us most, and that includes the distractions that kept our attention on hold for so long, apart from daydreaming. 

> In Zen They say: if something is boring after 2 minutes, try it for 4. If still boring, then 8. Then 16. Then 32. Eventually, one discovers that it's not boring at all. 
>
> -- John Cage (Quote rephrased)

Have you really **look** around you? What did you noticed? What _can_ you notice? Most of us just swipe past things, our brain deemed them not worthy of our attention. In fact, what's worthy of our attention? Instagram posts and the like! We choose what we want to focus on by telling our unconscious's part of our brain. To refocus and redefine what's worth looking at requires attention, hence effort, skill, practice, and conscious decision from our part. **What are we curious about?** When we're curious about something, it's what gets us so involved in it that we forgot about our ego (ourselves), time, and place -- you could call it "flow state" if you want, following Csikzenmihalyi's definition. Is there really things on social media that can get you curious? Perhaps there is, but rarely. Most of the contents are just flooding, and they are there to _amplify_ our beliefs, not to _change_ our beliefs! So, if you think the world is lonely, and it's not your fault, you would seek for confirmation that it's really not your fault, and if the social media's algorithm knew that you're seeking for such confirmation, it'll show you posts/feeds that 'confirm' you got it right, suppressing any contrasting posts. Ultimately, that's what divides our beliefs into black and white, right? Supposingly they have shades of gray, but because social media (and in the past, TV and radios) amplify such beliefs to push the grey out of their region to the two extremums, they formed different channels where one channel always put news on the extreme left, the others on the extreme right. And we who choose a side would never see the contradictions on the other side. In the past, to change side, simply change the TV/radio channel. Nowadays, you have to deliberately search the other side for the social media algorithm to get that you'd changed your mind and start showing you opposite stuffs; and that requires more effort than a few clicks on the remote buttons! Ultimately, preventing you from changing your mind; for the world likes stability and consistency, not turbulence. Alas, the latter is natural, the former is forced. 

It's wonderful how we're so strong at denying. There was a project one was doing, it requires the use of USB to RS485 adapter (imagine your phone charger, one side is the USB to plug to computer, the other side for the phone, both side different). Now, the adapter can be bought, but because the guy whom proposed this project want it his way (or the highway), he bought a USB to VGA cable (the VGA part uses RS485) and expect us to broke it up, figure out where the wires are, and solder it ourselves, rather than buying an existing product. When one bought it and showed it to him that he needed to buy 'that' instead of the VGA thingy, he blindly nodded, ok, problem solved, it's none of my business now. The thing is, he didn't get it. He cannot admit his mistake of buying the wrong thing, so one have to be responsible for him. And unfortunately, one don't really want to be responsible for him, for he is none of my business too! But one feels it wonderful: how great a length someone can go to just to deny one's mistake, "as if something never happened", and acted like life goes on as usual. And yesterday, one watched a video on Big Think that just said about that: that's how people will act in case of disaster: denial. Only the trained ones, or those whom have experienced on similar disaster themselves in the past (and presumably survived such disaster, or they wouldn't be here right now) would have a (much) shorter denial period before acting to bring oneself to safety. E.g. is it 500+ people on a plane died because they didn't get outside, so they get hallucinated when the smoke filled the room? And one person (and perhaps another that he/she brought along with him/her) got out to safety, because in his/her past experience, (s)he had experienced how fast smoke can fill a room when there's a fire going, so (s)he acted. 

It takes discipline to bring your attention back again and again, with unwavering consistency, to that same thing. Drop-down menus does not demand attention; you just look through and let your brain pick the one you 'like most' on the first sight. What, you think you're not picking the one you like most, but that you think is most closest to you? Then ask, had you wavered? If you didn't, you probably didn't have thought about it. Sometimes, one did, rolling over the choices for, say, 3 minutes, before choosing one that most fit; but does not fill satisfied because one act differently in different situation, so one want to pick more than one but can't. That's of the tests like Myers Briggs and Big 5 and other personality test, if you knew about them. Instead, if we have a question and a text box that requires us to type down our answers, think about the time and effort it takes for us to answer; 3 minutes isn't enough to fill the box with something satisfying, what to say of a few seconds? 

What one want, is not to meet people via online. Let's create back the parks and social spaces where people could mingle on a given day and just meet new people, undistracted by phones and other virtual reality! 

Algorithms don't like surprises, challenges, and change. That's what personal brand is -- constant, stable, never changing. Customers know they can trust the never-changing because they'll deliver _as expected._ Alas, life is too boring that way. To live life, we need surprises once in a while, preferably sooner than later; we need challenges that puts us into the problem-solving mind, to not feel bored and fall back on doomscrolling; and change is required for the first two to materialize. But social media and etc. targets only those that we already like, to overwhelm us with what we like. There's a saying before, that if you can't take 'only enough', you'll soon hate what you previously like. 

And there's _tolerating differences_. Do you quarrel with someone and just walked away, saying that it's "their fault" for not abiding with you? Do they think the same? When it comes to science, debating is common, and people stays friendly (ideally) even after the debate; for they can have different perspective and take on different beliefs, but it won't disturb their relationship. Why? A world with no differences is too boring! A world where everyone just kiss your ass does not offer challenges. And for scientists, it's the challenges that came from the differences that excites them. Therefore, they embrace challenges. Alas, scientists are also human; ask them of their private life and they don't necessarily carry forward their work's attitude with their families and friends. But we need such attitude -- a clash between different minds, different thoughts, different beliefs, that can sparks creativity; and if we make friends with those that have such differences with us, and hold us together via the differences than via similarities (most usually), we could not only enjoy a challenge, but appreciate there's someone out there that don't think the same as us and make our life more vibrant. Someone might just be speaking their voice, if you asked. Others might only speak against you because they care about you -- that is, if they don't care about you, they'll just let you do whatever you want, for the sake of liberty; but if they care about you, they won't let you always get what you want, like drinking 2 cans of coke every day. They'll care about your health, for example, and took it as their responsibility to help you withdraw from drinking so much coke if they already know it'll deteriorate your health. 

Finally, author speaks about the info on social media **lacks context, both spatially and temporally.** For example, because we don't know what our audience are if we're public celebrity that anyone can follows, we tend to create info that suits everyone, that offends no one. If you know your audience, you'd target each with a slightly different version of the story, such as ignoring the dangers when speaking of your travels with your parents to not let them worry, but you speak of such dangers, phrased as 'adventurous', when speaking to your friends. With the collapse of context, plus the expectation of most public on us not to change our mind (personal branding), the 'spatial' context is lost. As for the temporal context, consider reading a book. Things from the previous paragraphs were articulated on the next paragraph. Or perhaps, both paragraphs are related under one big topic, what the author wants to say. Ultimately, there are relationships within the chapter. What about in Twitter (X)? Does the previous tweet relate to the next tweet? Does the previous tweet from the same person as the next tweet? Most probably no and no. And worse, because people using social media are so impatient, perhaps a short paragraph is what they'll read at most. Something like this article? They'd lost their patience by the time one started the 2nd paragraph. Therefore, with limited number of words to convey your ideas, you simplify stuffs to put in only the most important things, skimming out those other details. Alas, it's the details that make minor tweaks and even changes how you view the situation. That's when we say, the headline never reflects the body -- because it doesn't; the headline has no context (well OK, you self-impose what you believe in on it, and interpret it via your rose-colored glasses); that's in the body. And to be catchy, sometimes, you just have to make things that justify other people's beliefs, and most of the times, that means not telling the truth. Plus people's power to reject and filter out anything that don't meet their beliefs, it's highly likely people will just look at you blandly, nod and say yeah, but everything goes in one side of their ear and exits the other side -- they can not believe what doesn't fit their expectations. And if the information is about political... No wonder people are so angry at empty words; they don't even know what's happening, not at all! But to the company, that's OK -- after all, their anger kept them using the platform, no? And if we put a few ads in their way, that makes them some money, no? 

A lot of thoughts, clear thought, requires time. Impatience does not allow time, nor embraces time. Have you ever pause awkwardly long (say, 7-10 seconds), during conversations? Try it. It requires time to think. Tell the other person in advance you'll pause long, and ask them to embrace the pause; any urges should be suppressed. It's worth it. 

The addictiveness of social media didn't end. Have you ever created a content, posted it on social media, and keep checking back for how many likes (or equivalent, like 'views') you've got? In that relentless checking in every few minutes, did you realize how much time and attention had you wasted? As an aggregative number, does it matter for you to check back every few minutes? Probably no, but we who were slaves to praises and pride wants acknowledgement. So we kept going back, to find those who shower us with praises, and hope to live in the endless now. And esp. if you're not a popular guy, like one. If you're reading this now, you may well be the only one reading this, for one don't have a bunch of subscribers, nor a bunch of followers, tracking what one's saying. The internet are full of more addictive stuffs than what one had to say. Plus, who is one that others should care? Treating this as a public diary (and one kept a personal one too), and because this website one develop oneself, one don't put any way of liking nor commenting (well, you can comment, but go to Github and open an issue/discussion, which is not easy because you must have a Github account before you can do it, and you must have the time and attention and conviction and motivation before you're willing to put your thoughts into words), so one don't have to check back. If it'd be like an Instagram post, and one sees no one is giving one a like (or very little), isn't it like shouting into the void? Shouts where nobody hears, because everyone else is shouting? Ever gone to a night market before? (Not sure if there's a non-Asian night market but yeah, Asian night market) Everyone else is shouting to have their product sold, and you already silenced them, filtered them out of your brain. You only trust your eyes to find what you want, hopefully unaffected by the shouts that overwhelmed your brains. On the other hand, a one-to-one session with someone else is awesome! In fact, one never learned how to speak in a group situation, for if there are 3 person, it's always the other two that're speaking and one listening. So, one-to-one only, the rest one gave up. And because we can't multitask, it makes sense to speak only to one person -- to give that guy/gal your full attention, saying the right thing(s) to the right person at the right time. And if you're doing public speaking to a small group of people, yeah, giving those interested in what you're speaking, to the right group of people, at the right time. That works as well; better than shouting into the void. 

> _Our time well spent are important and useful for us, but they're not tweet-worthy, get no new connections, no new followers._

And finally, what is development? A development/progress of something meant the destruction of other things, is it not? To construct a building, you "clear the land", and clearing the land means removing the trees and shrubs and plants and animals that live there previously, ultimately removing a habitat. 

**Notes:** One would not insert any hyperlink into the stuffs like 4000 weeks. You can search it up yourself. Yeah, just say one is lazy or what. 

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 