# Models of My Life By Herbert Simon
afterthought

The book was intended as an autobiography of the author. Particularly, it records mostly the working part of his life, since that's the public ones that his friends would like to know more about, than the private life. In essence, one learns that, despite changing field, he continued to be a great scientist in the new field that he enters. Also, entering a new field isn't always totally unrelated to the old; after all, he was trying to search for "how the human mind works", if one got it correctly. And the various research in various discipline tested the idea. To one, it seems to have some relationship with Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman's researches on behavioral, though they're certainly not the same. But, what field have no overlaps with others? 

When he wrote, he isn't holding back sharing the wisdom he'd learned from certain events, or a series of events. Perhaps they were something that he'd initially done it wrong, felt a slight regret (maybe), then wish to had done it differently. And in that scenario, we tend to love sharing what we learned so others don't make the same mistake (unless one's stingy about it and don't want others to know, or if it's trade secrets one want to have an advantage over others). 

Because one is reading the Three Questions by Ken Fisher, one remember particularly when author mentioned that, in investing, the only thing that makes you an edge over others is knowing something others don't know. Now, Ken Fisher also endorse that in his book Three Questions. In fact, the asking of the Three Questions is to know something others don't know, or can't understand (and only you can understand, or at least only a few in the whole world can understand that it's not enough to price in the market), and a control of our behavior by logic overriding. With both sides endorsing, one feels overconfident that that is the right skill. Time to break down one's overconfident and be just confident enough! 

Author was also kind enough to share how he did his research in the afterword section. That was something worth reading analytically, going through again and again. It lay out the scientific method adopted by author, not exactly the same mentioned in the formal textbooks we had nowadays, but slightly altered; and since he's a better researcher than most of us readers, why not we learn from him? 

Of course, it's also an enjoyable read. Firstly, it's not too long a story. One had been stuck in Warren Buffett's autobiography at around page 550 because it's a little too long (400 pages really is the longest for books, and over 450, it's hard to keep one's attention at it without chasing the pages, reading to maximize the no. of pages read than reading to understand. Well, unless the book can keep you on till the end. At least, that book can't. And years ago, one tried to read Nelson Mandela's biography, also a lengthy one, also can't keep one's attention beyond 450, though one can't remember until where one read that, though on one's goodreads, it says page 250, but one don't remember if that's the latest update or not.).

[Find me at Upwork](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 