# Snowball (Warren Buffett Autobiography) By Alice Schroeder
afterthought autobiography

Warren Buffett's life is Warren Buffett's life. After all, it's not our freedom to criticize other people's life and the choices they make. Though, because we use autobiography as models of our life, we tend to want to pick up some things and not the others. Trying to pick up everything is futile: you're making yourself an image of someone else. Furthermore, if you read multiple biographies and there are multiple people you want to imitate, it's impossible to follow all of them at once in whole. That's why we criticize -- not to disgust the "negative" stuffs that the person, our potential model, had done; but to choose, based on our own goals in life, what we want to mirror. 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

For Warren Buffett, his ability to say "no" without feeling guilty is excellent! His ability to patiently wait things out is superb! And we can learn something from him in money making (though, his money making is not at all like investment, but company owners, ever since he owned Berkshire -- and that, for most of us, is not viable). On the other hand, what one don't want to learn from him, is, like many other people's, the mess in his relationship life -- be it the single-direction "want" than "give" in his early life; the inability to face a trauma head to head even if it hurt; and for work, the misunderstanding that shareholders are more important than employers and employees -- as if the former is an equal, the latter are slaves. 

Of course, outside relationships, we also have different goals. For him, it's earning money and reputation. For one, reputation is the worst thing you can ever earn, because it only gives you sleepless nights, constant alert for 'danger' (high adrenaline), and too dependent on others. Rather, a mediocre reputation is sufficient, just so people don't start treating you as objects and allows you to make friends with them starting from a strangers standpoint than a celebrity standpoint (yeap, 'mediocre' means 'not popular' or 'a nobody to most others'). Money is something important, yes, esp. in this capitalistic world where you need it to do something; but it isn't the ultimate goal in life. For one, the money is to travel, and travel is to find new friends; no money, no travel, hence no friends. Yeah, friends in where one live is OK, but they're not as diverse as one wanted them to be, so... Learnings of how to be a person, how to care for a relationship, etc. are more important than money, though money independence is required to keep it out of mind. Aiming for earning more money, therefore, is not what one wanted. Well, maybe, if one wanted the money to be like Elon Musk and play with rockets. It's not like you earn money building rockets _yet_, right? He currently only have some programs on sending some rich people to space, but even the price charged, the revenue, is perhaps only enough to cover the flight cost, and the extra earned (if any) probably couldn't yet fund any researches. Tesla is where he got his money to fund his rocket spendings, from one company to another company the money transfers, one _guesses_. Otherwise, where to get the money? 

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 