# The Renaissance By Will & Ariel Durant
afterthought history

When one heard the word "Renaissance," one pictured an utopia of colors. Many years ago, one watched a manga staged in Venice, the beautifulness of the coloring, of the animated figure, the introduced scene, and the word "Venice," all signals a perfect beauty. One actually don't know about the Renaissance then, only that Venice is in Italy. That's it. 

To think of Rome as the only city in Italy is dang wrong. Probably because one confused, unconsciously, the Rome of Italy with the Rome of the Roman Empire. The gladiator scene were already in ruins. Same for the aqueduct. The Rome of Italy is nothing similar to the Rome of the Roman Empire. 

In [The Rise and Fall of Great Powers by Paul Kennedy](https://www.amazon.com/Rise-Fall-Great-Powers/dp/0679720197), one read about "The Medici Family" as a trader family. One was playing Assassin Creed: Brotherhood at that time, which was staged in Rome during Renaissance, and there are shops around that are opened by "Medici." So one got curious, what is the history of this "Medici" family, except that it has no relationship with "medicine"? 

In the same game, we are to bring down the Borgia's rule; except it staged on Cesare Borgia (the book call it Caesar, but one'll call it Cesare) rather than his dad, Alexandar VI. That got one interested about the Borgia family, to learn more about Cesare and Lucrezia Borgia. The game itself is interesting, but stories are certainly changed to fit the game's setting. What's more? We have Niccolo Machiavelli, which one thought was an Englishman!!! [1] That proves oneself wrong. Then, we have Leonardo, and one just realize Leonardo is from the Renaissance! That's second. So many unknown, one really need to clarify one's assumptions. It so happens one jumped onto Will and Durant book series, and immediately, skip all other books and pick up Book no. 5: The Renaissance. That'll do. 

Unlike [The Rise and Fall of Great Powers by Paul Kennedy](https://www.amazon.com/Rise-Fall-Great-Powers/dp/0679720197), which bombard its reader with a bunch of numbers (great at the beginning but gradually grow tired as one continues reading), and entry from a point of view of economics; this book, split into several parts, covers the art and politics for the most part, but also touch on other stuffs of ordinary people in Part V. While it certainly isn't completely covered, it does offers a point of view from an outline that satisfy most people, for you won't want to be bombarded with numbers unless you have a fascination for numbers, right? 

Not originating from Europe, one don't know that it was ruled city by city at the time. While one read about city by city ruling in many Chinese novels, their background speaks of the end of the world, where zombies are traversing and the main country where the main protagonist locates (a varietied of names that usually represent "the central country", which in real life we call China) central control system no longer can reach all parts [2], hence it splits into towns and city, with each ruling independent of one another. Yet, it's fascinating to see that this really happens, except not in a zombie background, but the Renaissance Italy. Moreover, the Medici wasn't just a trader family; it was the ruler of Florence. Who would have known, that the stage of Italy wasn't set in Rome, not in Venice, but in Florence? [3] One didn't even heard about Florence before. Anyways, the ruling state was short, only for 3 generations and a hundred years; compared to China's empire which rules for longer periods, like 400 years, and 100 years is very short ruling period. 

Perhaps one isn't a fascination of art. The description of art, while enjoyable to people who loves art, found the listings too long. Especially the names of the drawings, which they have a lot of them; author found them listing down important for the reader to search for it; yet for one, using "etc." after 2 or 3 listings suffices. So that's one's thinking; but one can understand that the authors doesn't just write for one, but for a wider audience with wider taste. One would say they uses good and clear English. The political part unfolded like a fictitious narrative. It's always difficult, in one's point of view, to incorporate non-fictitious writing with fictitious narratives. You might argue, history is easier to be narratives. Probably. Yet, narratives itself have good and bad, if you read fictions. Good author knows what **not** to incorporate in a narrative, to engage its readers' attention to the text, to continue on with subsequent chapters, and not force oneself to finish chapter 1 and move on with life, never to pick it up again. 

One feels lucky, for one come to the book to learn more about the whole Renaissance, than about a particular family like Medici or Borgia. One appreciates one not skip through all the chapters immediately to read Medici, Borgia, Leonardo, Machiavelli, and be done with it. The world are not staged with the current knowledge that one knows, and to expand the breadth towards other cities, like Milan (which one forgot it exists, despite a classmate of mine from Milan); and some other city names like Tuscany, Umbria, Mantua, Ferrara, which one never heard before. To suppress oneself from skipping to the topic of one's peak interest, rewards one with the habit of continual reading till the end (which one, as of writing, is on the final chapter, just a few days before finishing). 

The chapter dedicated to Lucrezia Borgia, though, is heart palpitating. For one knows, before one read, that girls from higher families are doomed as a product of politics. She was no different, as the author describes (one paraphrase this from memory, not exact words): "frequently finding herself in different beds..." and incest wasn't illegal back then, but authors didn't know, for there are little reliable records to prove this family history. Author described her as gentle; not in Assassin Creed: Brotherhood's, which try not to let his brother find out she sleeps with someone else from the Church than her own brother, when he was away on missions.

What's accurate, indeed, is Leonardo does serve the Borgia. Except most of his "war machines" never came to real use, unlike in the game, which they put it to real use, like his tanks and flying machines, for you to enjoy the game more. 

Part V and Part VI describes more of the normal people, and normal life in Italy. And, the collapse of the Renaissance. There's not much to say here, except in Chapter XXII, about Titian. What one fascinates isn't that he's perhaps the few last great artists of the renaissance, but that he lives to age 99! Now, that's what one likes to hear. Titian isn't the only guy, and there are some other people earlier in the book and later (Luigi Cornaro?) that lives to nearly a century. It just proves that we aren't the ones who can live to age 100; people in the past, whom die earlier being treated by doctors (for their mostly stupid interventions that makes you die faster, like bloodletting), have no advanced medicine, and yet can lived to old age. Their average age was low due to high child mortality rate. Our average age was high due to low child mortality rate, at least in the developing and developed world. That's what's interesting. 

Overall, the book keeps the narratives lively, supply interesting information, and if you read 10 pages daily (with pause rarely), you can complete it within 3-4 months. That's how a book this thick is completed, not to burn yourself out reading, like those addictive novels. Actually, one got tired reading [The Rise and Fall of Great Powers by Paul Kennedy](https://www.amazon.com/Rise-Fall-Great-Powers/dp/0679720197) due to its numbers, so one stop after finishing Chapter 6, and proceed with this book. One was reading [Writing to Learn](https://www.amazon.com/Writing-Learn-William-Zinsser/dp/0062720406) when one started, and one hunts for good and clear English that narrates the text alive. Author is one. Strongly encouraged! 


### Edit 28/05/2024:
One may had confused Venice with Vienna from Austria. The manga, 维也纳, seemed to refer to Vienna than Venice. 


### Notes: 
1. One actually confused Niccolo Machiavelli with a character from a novel, called Nicholas Flamel, so Niccolo and Nicholas, not much differently sound inside one's mind. A search online said "Nicolas Flamel" isn't even English, but French. 
2. Just proves how important decentralization is. If your food is concentratedly produced in one part of the country, and if your country is large, if something breaks, you can't transport food to that part, and everyone's gonna be in famine state. That's how [Antifragile](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1400067820/ref=as_li_qf_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1400067820&linkId=d0d28d2424326ff3226ed525c676f24d) describes it. 
3. That's what one was thinking at the time, because Part II of the book was "The Florentine Renaissance", not "The Venetian Renaissance" or others, so the other cities were only to come in Part III. 