# Afterthought: Filters Against Folly By Garrett Hardin
afterthought

If you read enough books (maybe including blog/articles, one don't know), if we ignore those uninteresting books, and those that don't gain you knowledge, and those that even stole knowledge from you by making you felt more stupid reading it, you'll find that, some books only gain you knowledge, but other books gain you paradigm change. You have an aha moment reading those books when people share their knowledge, and if you're lucky, their wisdom. They're like a lamp that stretches on the far end of the road, to guide you from the deviating path that they had tried and failed; and you could choose those path that they had not tried, to leave your wisdom to the next generation; or you could follow their wisdom and achieve what they had regret not achieving. But that's that. Knowledge and wisdom, while they gave you an aha moment of learning something new, doesn't give you that shocking feeling like, "Oh, I had been thinking this way, maybe, but it was so foggy in front that one can't see clearly." 

To make an analogy, assume that someone had set up a light at the end of the foggy road, to which you want to follow through. However, every step you take toward the end of the road, you could only see the light, but nothing around you. The only reason you keep walking isn't because you can see your vicinity, or you could see the road below you, but because there was a light at the end of the road guiding you towards that direction. Even if the road is zig zag and you divert from it, you still have the direction, and you took the shortest path, regardless of whether you're walking on a road or grassy lanes or sheep dung or whatever; doesn't matter, nothing blocks you from reaching your destination. 

A paradigm change book is a light that you hold and shine what is in your surrounding. For the first time, you have two lights: one at the end telling you where to go, one in your hand that gave you a choice on what path you want to take, and the ability to see clearly what's under your feet. This allows you to take a different path towards where there was no light before, even if that means leaving you with regret, but you have seen through, and hold the torch, and pluck your own torch at the end of the road for the later comers to follow. 

Now, not many books have this kind of insight-opening looks. This book is certainly one. One had been unconsciously using the literate and numerate filter, usually separately, without one knowing it. Yet, this book puts it crisp and clear that there are the literate and numerate filters at work; and an 'ecolate' filter which one probably almost never used, that are disguised in other names like "second-order thinking" or "nth-order consequences". And because we usually hold only one filter at a time, our rose-colored glasses blinds us from looking things from another perspective. Worse, the rose-colored glasses, even when we kept our mind open to possibilities, wouldn't let our mind triggers; they had already been filtered out before reaching our conscious mind. 

Now, let's make some summary of what the book generally told, and some of the important points. Because the book is so good, one don't have any anti-thesis to go against the author, hence we'll make summary, as previously done with good books. 

First things first. Experts have their narrow field of vision, on a tree, to take an analogy, while layman see the forest. Due to the difference in perspective, both take in different input from the same event, and give a different output: their suggestions differ depends on what they see. Important thing is, we shouldn't reject what a layman said just because they don't have a degree. Failing to do so is a result of arrogance; and staying humble and keep learning is our goal. That said, experts don't always get things right. Experts are human, after all; they could be wrong nonetheless. Kahneman and Tversky had researched a lot on this, to make oneself sensitive to one's biases and underlying assumptions. 

The essence of the book focuses on the three filters author introduced. There may be more filters, but these are the major ones: 
- the literate filter
- the numerate filter
- the ecolate filter ('ecolate' comes from 'ecology').

Each filter asks a different question: 

| Filter | Question |
| --- | --- |
| Literate | What are the (most appropriate) words? |
| Numerate | What are the numbers, What are the exact quantities, the proportions, and the rates? |
| Ecolate | And then what? |

For literate, changing the words, we can invoke a different feeling from the people reading/listening to it. The numerate filter had to do with numbers, and we usually use it in science; but it could be non-absolute numbers, like a "factor of 10" difference via comparison (scale), or proportions, or rates. The ecolate filter deals with the second-order, third-order, nth-order consequences that we can't predict with our actions. For example, pesticides used to kill a bug also kill its predator; ironically resulting in the widespread of either that bug, or other bugs to replace the ecosystem. The ecolate filter calls for caution and humility. 

There was a mental model that talks about inversion one saw in fs.blog (multiple blogs which one felt lazy to link here, so you'd want to search for yourself rather than one linking you there). Now, we always said that words are promote thought (communicate thought, express something, whatever), but we never thought of **words can prevent thought.** Yet, we live in a world where words are use to prevent thought: propaganda during the last century war, promoters trying to conceal the drawbacks of their product nowadays, or promoters that casually guide you away from asking questions that causes harm to their product/service's reputations; so you sign that thing, pay the money, then that's still not done. To ensure there are more people paying, they'll kept you concealed until they earn enough money, or if possible, forever, so they can keep getting money from you. From one's perspective, you could also see such stuffs on web's terms and conditions: they made it very long, use a lot of rubbish words, to make sure you don't read it and just sign; so if anything goes wrong, it's your fault. And to make sure you don't understand but get tricked, they'll replace easy to understand words with difficult to understand words, if possible all of it, so that it can intimidate non-native speakers (especially if the majority of their customers are non-native speakers. You think the whole world knows English to native level? At least one don't.). 

From the numerate perspective, to restrict thought, we could use thought-stopper like "infinity": the Earth had an infinite amount of food! Infinite amount of clean water! Infinite amount of air (so we don't have to care putting the carbons into the air, since the finite carbon will be diffused in the infinite air, and the composition, even if all of them aggregate together at large scale, will be nil, for large number is still finite but earth has infinite air, and any number, large or small, divide by infinite is zero). It's an indirect way to tell you, "_I refuse to talk about it._"

Another problem with numerate filter. We could make "arbitrary" decisions, for not all actions we could always plan ahead, sometimes because no point, other times because impossible. **Yet, some people tried to eliminate risk so strongly that, in the end, they make life riskier.** Nassim Taleb mentioned before, whatever risk you do not take, that's because someone took the risk for you. In this case, if you have "Zero Tolerance" for something, you're up for trouble. Nothing could be totally eliminated, even at all cost. Your computer _will_ go bluescreen one day, however stable it is. You _will_ have a bad day one day, however lucky and isolated you are (to keep life 'stable'). Stability is a fantasy we created that only lives in our dream; in reality, the 99% that seems a great promise, the 1% isn't that small when spread over billions of people multiplied by billions to trillions of seconds. 

Just talking about a system, they're handled by both tech and human. Tech reliability, we usually can optimize it to very high; human? Unfortunately not. If we try to improve human, we could make a great progress forward, yet we don't; because human requires changing other people, which is difficult, while tech is a dead object that don't have its own thought and we can manipulate 'easily', so we tried to 'optimize' tech even if the resulting improvement is far less than if we improve the human system. We could move some of the fallible elements from human by letting machines handle them; though there's a limit to what machines can do. Second, assume that you have machines of 99% reliability. Your factory probably have "steps": it passes some manufacturing of some parts, to the factory that aggregates the parts and do some welding or whatever if necessary, aggregate into larger parts, so on and so forth. If you have 51 such "steps" in the pipeline, the "stability/reliability" of your end product would drop to slightly less than 60%! That just show how unreliable systems are, and we probably could do little to 'eliminate' the uncertainty. We could only content ourselves living with uncertainty, and bear it. 

In worst case scenario, the very safety system you devise as fail-safe might become the failure point of the whole system, just because you didn't thought of such "integration test" or "unit test": it didn't even come into your mind until it happened! 

The **First Law of Ecology: Everything is connected to everything else.** Author propose a change in wording: **_We can never do merely one thing._** Whatever we do, there are "side effects", most of which we're unaware of. The side effects are rarely positive, that is. These side effects don't necessarily happen immediately; they might appears years or decades later! Who cares about climate change when the First Industrial Revolution 200+ years ago first started puffing smoke and carbon into the air? They don't even notice anything, not until a century later. There are people whom made their guess though, but their voice are dampened and crowded out by other more pressing matters of the day. Oh, one more thing, _there are no such thing as side effects._ All effects are "main" effects; there's only a difference between "desirable" and "undesirable" effects. Similarly, _waste isn't real_. They're just product we produce, **NOT BY-PRODUCT**! There's no such thing as "by-product", only "product". 

Next, author calls for a difference in time perspective. For economists, 5 years is considered "long"; it's unpredictable longer than that. For biologists and historians, the last million years is considered "near". Tens of millions of years, into the dinosaurs age, is "not that far". Billions of years ago, such as the great rain that cause the sea to form, if that ever exist, is "far". 

Now, rich and poor people have different time perspective. For the poor that can't even afford food, it's highly probable to die before tomorrow arrives; therefore, it makes sense to borrow lots of money at whatever interest rates -- the interest rates is merely there to prove that they had a high chance of dying before they could pay back. 

(Some spreaded words that isn't worth forming paragraph):
- Overpopulation favors economic inequality. 
- No amount of good intention can excuse a counterproductive measure. 

Now, we talked about "infinity" before. Another word is "sacred" or "tradition": because it's God's giving, or because it's passed down as heritage, we shouldn't question it. End of story. Shouldn't even question it in the first place. See the coming? Thought stoppers! 

Another thing is what author called CC-PP Game. CC stands for Commonized Costs, PP stands for Privatized Profits. Basically, if there's a problem that requires payment, the public will pay for it, usually with a mediator like the government, via tax money. But if there are some gains, only those specific people directly benefits; the majority don't get anything. Such game are played and concealed by words so that most people don't know what games the "adults" play. Though, just because many "adults" play doesn't mean we mundane people can tolerate it, now that we know of it. 

- Every widespread practice is promoted by self-interest, often in disguised forms. 

Say, medicine. We don't want to be sick, right? But we lives a sedentary lives, by our choice! Is that our Rights to live a sedentary lives? Not unless you pay the medical bills yourself. Why should others pay your bills if you willingly fall sick? As for the doctors, to earn more money from the commonized pool of money, they may demand you do this test and that test and yada yada, just to get the money into their pockets. Privatized Profits! 

Back to "scale" in numerate filter. Christian-Marxist "From each according to one's ability, to each according to one's needs." did not work when scale become huge, probably more than 150 people. That's because that analogy requires "shame" at work. When the number become huge, each do not know about anyone else; just go to a city and you'll see people care only for their own business, unless you intentionally wear something funny (or perform some action/noise) to attract their attention. "Mind your own business" is more appropriate. Instead, we should "From each according to one's abilities, to each according to one's _work_." That'd be more appropriate. 

There are also problems that should be solved in the local scale, but because we don't want to care about it, we make it a global problem; and since global coordination is so difficult, it makes an excuse to put it off into the indefinite future until it pressures us to make changes, that if the whole world don't change in 5 years, we'll face great undesirable consequences, hence leaving us with no other choice than to deal with it. And that is if it's deal-able that late into the stage. God knows if you could have a "carbon deionizer" that sucks in carbon dioxide from the air, and release oxygen, and there's a hole below that "poop" the carbon molecules into the ground, which could be piped directly to a hole below it. 

> _Never globalize a problem if it can possibly be dealt with locally._

There are more concepts that one don't discuss here due to the "new information per chapter" being very high, and their unique information makes one want to write everything down, but feels it's better for you to read the book yourself. Like, one skip how to use "numerate" filters to notice that something "literate" is "singular", so called "singular ethics" in the book. We also skipped another example on how U.S. tax money was used to finance other countries' problems, and because the country can't pay back, F.D.I.C. have to step in and use taxpayer money to pay for the debt caused by non U.S. government. The profit goes to the private banks, of course! The cost, of course, goes to the people. After all, the people can lose money, but the bank can't, right? Not right. The book will be included at the end of this blog, don't leave yet! 

One last thing before we go, there's something called "inversion", also a mental model on fs.blog you'll search yourself. What one want to say is, if there's a "shortage of supply", we should think of a "longage of demand", so that "inverse" the words. But, why does dictionary don't have the word "longage"? Because we refuse to think about "longage" -- "shortage" brings us profits, "longage" don't. Say, "shortage of food", why not "longage of people", so instead of increase our food supply, we should reduce the population in the world? Well, OK, China did exactly that with the One-Child Policy; the rest of the world don't. 

The rest of the article just talk about global problem at scale, nothing too new a concept but new examples were included. If there are any takeaway from this, it would be these two: 

1. Remember to use all literate, numerate, and ecolate filters. 
2. Be aware of whom playing the CC-PP Game. 

[And you can get a digital copy of the book here for free.](https://archive.org/details/filtersagainstfo00hard)

[One now offers casual writing service to the public. Check it out!](https://www.fiverr.com/s/D84XrA)