# The Intelligent Investor By Benjamin Graham
afterthought

One started reading [Superforecasting](https://www.amazon.com/Superforecasting-Science-Prediction-Philip-Tetlock-ebook/dp/B00RKO6MS8) to predict the market, after failed speculation. Perhaps, with the ability to control the flow of time, one can get back into the past, just before the price of a crypto coin drop, and sell it; and vice versa for buy. Therefore, one needs to steal some power from Chrono, the power to control the passage of time; and that's why one needs superforecasting skills. 

[Antifragile](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1400067820/ref=as_li_qf_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&creative=9325&creativeASIN=1400067820&linkId=d0d28d2424326ff3226ed525c676f24d) then slap one's face. No, the "Black Swan" are unpredictable event. To get it, you need to diversify wide, with a gambling attitude. Reason? You can't afford to not catch the ride. Therefore, you shall put in money as small as possible, as wide as possible, and try to catch that Black Swan. This, is what Graham called the "defensive approach." By buying an low-cost index fund, you essentially buy every single common stock, and generally, you do as well as the market. If the market caught a Black Swan, you also caught a Black Swan. Better than trying to predict the next Microsoft. 

Graham agrees, that without the powers of Chrono, you can't act like as if you have the powers of Chrono. Instead, one need something more solid. Market prices are influences by lots of people's attitudes toward something, some company, and other fads and what nots, swayed by the wind here and there. Instead, the underlying value of the company is what determines whether or not to buy stock of that company. If the company is worth more than the current market price, you buy it, it probably will rise in the future, and you gain. 

What one like about this chapter is, **we forgot to ask "How much?"** That's the question! That's the question that one never asks. We buy because we believe that it'll rise in the future, at whatever the price today. As if it'll rise to infinity! Oh, even if one already knows it won't rise to infinity, one can't assure oneself won't be swayed by other people's thought. For example, one's dad like to watch to news to make prediction for how Bitcoin fares; then bet. He talks with my uncle about it, and while one won't eavesdrop deliberately, loud sound inevitably enters one's ear (while not in a "flow" state); and it influence one, with or without one's conscious of it. The worse, one ever heard he watched something on YouTube, saying they predicted Bitcoin going up to $100k. Can you believe it? 

The highest price Bitcoin reached just 3 years ago, 2021, is barely 70k, and with at least 2 general trend going on (one large sinusoidal curve from its sentiments of buy and sell, and a general linear straight line going up, what Ray Dalio would call "productivity line," though it doesn't really represent productivity in Bitcoin's case). Even if you project the "productivity line", a meaningful estimate would be $75k; and voilà, Bitcoin reached $73k at the top, and here it comes dropping very slowly since 2 months ago. The problem now is whether or not to sell; because it doesn't drop hard enough to justify one's pain; and without being painful enough, one can't justify whether to sell more or sell less. The latter action is executed instead; leaving a third of one's asset still in volatile currency. 

So far, not too bad. If you define "risk" as missing out, certainly, one had done some bad stuffs that Graham defined not, like selling when it drops (one read the chapter after one already sold few days ago, whoops)... but if you define it as overall gain in prices, it wasn't too bad, not the maximal profit, but a profit nonetheless. That's the second learning one needed from Graham: **to control one's emotions, not to be swayed by the market.** As Graham notes, it's unjustifiable to sell stocks (or bonds, or cryptocurrency) just because its price drops; one should think whether one want to hold it if the market is absence; would one hold it because it deals a good business? 

The 4th Anniversary Edition (written on 1973, commented by Jason Zweig on either late 2002 or early 2003, after the dotcom bubble pop), both Warren Buffett and him recommended Chapter 8, and 20, while the latter also recommended Chapter 1, which distinguishes the difference between an investor and a speculator (a.k.a. gambler). Chapter 8 offers, rather than stressing about whether to buy or sell, is it the right time or not, one should have something mechanical, like dollar-cost averaging method. Though, while trading in crypto is relatively cheap (if you're trading less than $1000 worth, say, on Binance platform), trading with a broker on stock isn't cheap; therefore, dollar-cost averaging may be charged every time you put in money, one don't know. But if it is, Warren Buffett encouraged that you trade seldomly. Like, probably around 20 times in your lifetime, in large amounts if something is certain (or at least near certain, as probability is always hunting for its prey). Chapter 20 introduces the "margin of safety", how many "standard deviation" you have that, if a loss occur, you have enough cushion to get back at least as much as you put in? (In the extreme, do not lose too much?)

Let's be an intelligent investor, starting today. Let's not get swayed by market sentiments, as if "risk" means you earn less than somebody else (wtf???). After all, financial independence is what we aim for; and upon reaching it, probably more money won't be useful, unless you have an idea on how to use it (like opening a space company and build some spaceship, then send it to Mars for exploration. While other people are playing Mars colonization game virtually, you're here playing real Mars colonization game building some base on Mars, sending some pilings and cements and glass and whatever and build a house there for no reason other than fun...)