# "Lessons" of the past: The Use and Misuse of History By Ernest May
afterthought

Author listed in details the 4 different scenarios where histories had been misused, and state what alternatives it could have lead to "if only", plus a (relatively useless, in one's idea) prediction of what the "next decade" (as of writing) will be like (Relatively useless because it doesn't apply anymore, though you can compare it in hindsight to what happened if you're fancy with knowing his accuracy), and finally, he spokes about teaming up with historians, and opening up the database for access for accurate prediction. 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

Now, one don't really care about the politics, because it is none of my business. However, the ideas that author speaks of actually do apply outside politics. For example, while all the choices to make concerns the US government and the outside world (other countries), and the history they get from are from various sources (mostly of recent 'experiences'), why not apply it to individuals? 

Take one example. You originally trust smart. You start by trusting people _until_ they betrayed their trust with you. Logically, you would hold your principles and maintain the smart trust policy. However, what if one of the betrayal hurts so much that you cannot help but change your mind? You no longer smart trust, but closed the door, requiring others to prove themselves worth trustworthy each and every occasion before temporarily whitelisting them for that event, or for that day, then close it off again, and they're required to prove themselves as trustworthy as yesterday or as previous event before you re-open the door for them? [1] That was what happened with US government. And just look how similar it could be applied to us, author's suggestions. 

In some cases, author suggests we look back further into the 19th century or even earlier to see whether the event find more similarities, rather than being focused on the last. E.g. World War I is very different from World War II, in terms of why both are waged, and what causes them to wage. Therefore, United Nations, taking their learnings from League of Nations, isn't completely satisfying; because what causes the failure of the League of Nations may not apply to the United Nations. Then there's seeing Soviet Union Stalin similar to Nazi Germany's Hitler, just because communist is equated to (what's the name again for Nazi's), when in fact it's different. Then the belittlement of Korean War, wrongly thinking that South Korea will be aggressive towards North Korea, predicting North Korea as "almost impossible" to wage war with South Korea until they got slapped in the face loud and clear. To save face, they therefore intend to punish North Korea by sending strong forces and fight back, despite earlier analysis saying that it's a black hole that sucks money, and promise negative Return on Investment (i.e. all the money spent on bullets and weapons and missiles is guaranteed not to earn back by any means, money out but don't come in). Then the support for South Vietnam, in light of South Korea, now sees North Vietnam of doing the same as North Korea when they're in fact different, resulting in the bombing of North Vietnam. 

OK, the previous paragraph oversimplifies. E.g. For North Vietnam, there are considerations of China and Soviet Union intercept, because North Vietnam is communist. Then, there's the failure to check history of bombing a state: most bombing causes the enemy to become more steel-hearted to fight back, while a _threat_ of bombing (but didn't actually take action) usually cause the parties to start dividing and have internal conflicts. And for the others, you can read more of them yourself. But what one to say is, let's take them to personal concerns. 

Going back to our example. Just because you have the recent experience looming large in your brain and you focus on that history, forgetting or ignoring the past many that had proved otherwise, you changed for the exception rather than stay for what mostly happen. It makes no sense, statistical wise, because the probability of such event happening is smaller than you think, though higher than statistician think (due to the effect of 'luck' and perhaps, some 'digitization' [2]). Instead, it fare better if you don't change your idea before in that case; but because our emotions can't bear it, we change. 

Ultimately, it's loss aversion that causes us to change, for the better or for the worse. We sometimes swear to "never do that again", but is it true that the 'that' always lead to bad results? Probably no, but our heart hurt so much, even if other actions lead to worse results in most other cases, we do the other actions than 'that' action. In fact, we became so adept that we don't even analyze the problem before concluding that 'that' would not work (when perhaps, it could work). We stop at the surface, in an attempt to cut the pain it inflicted short from invoking memories. 

The moral of the story, is like what the author said. Perhaps, if we more rationally and logically analyze the situation shall we not give in to our emotional "never do it again". **You need to spend time with it!!!** Then remember all the philosophers whom said that we should struggle now and pleasure later. Of course, that requires rationalization: we don't want to put the 'later' as in afterlife; but neither do we want to indulge in the pleasure for 1 hour and suffer 6 hours of torture later. 

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 

### Notes: 
[1] One read a story before, one think it's popularized by Stack Overflow weekly digest. Someone working for their client as a software developer (presumably for maintenance), their client change the password each time the maintenance finish. Every day, or every time, there's a problem (during development stage, the product isn't even completed yet, as concerned) that requires access to that software, he/she had to call the client to ask for the password, again and again, again and again. Until (s)he was so annoyed (s)he posted the problem on Stack Overflow. 
[2] These are things that're difficult to prove scientifically. Suppose an event had 0.001% of happening, but because how history moves us, we tend to be not the other 99.999% but 0.001%, if you get what one meant. You thought, oh, the number is small, it won't happen (0%); but when it ended up happening, because you're "lucky enough"...