# Becoming Wise by Krista Tippett
afterthought

The book speaks about the conversations author had with lots and lots of people, which she indirectly refer to as wisdom. In one's opinion, one cannot be sure if they are really wisdom or not, but the teachings do really provide something interesting. In effect, it had provided us with a reference to what a life we can live that's outside the cliché of today -- aiming for productivity, fake work-life balance (yeah, 1kg of work balanced with 1 milligram of life, _fair enough_), competition all around, etc. that is only one part of life. 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

Adults should learn to calm themselves, and think in _slow, deep, geologic time_, and become less narcisistic. But alas, social media had such profound impact of inflicting pain and anger, to withhold your attention. Questions that're supposingly _complicated_ are reduced to black and white. That's not the way world works, unfortunately. What author defined as "wise person" means, they know how to not be swayed by the emotions of the society, esp. by social media. One should learn how to face the hard, the difficult, the complicated, than try to simplify them as if everything is Physics that can be simplified into $F = ma$. And there's a thing we take for granted: consistency, robustness, or whatever you call it. And alas, **surprise is the only constant.** 

The first thing author tap into are **words.** 

> The words we use shape how we understand ourselves, how we interpret the world, how we treat others.

But no, we want control. As for people that make us mad, we usually _tolerate_. Unfortunately, we couldn't really control the situation around us; or if we did, it's a fake, a fake that we can't realize until it's too late. And yes, if you tolerate for too long, it'll become your identity soon enough without you knowing. Only when we set other people in the same level as us, not trying to control them, not trying to tolerate them, can we grow some other emotions: being curious about them, being interested in them, wanting to know more about them. All in all, to make "just another stranger" into "someone I know, even if it's just a little." 

The black and white of social media makes hatred among different people so much that even seeing their faces makes you angry. For those genuinely curious, those holding opposing opinions as us are where we could learn the most from, so don't set out to change their mind. Set out to change your mind. Listen to what they have to say. And when you can understand their standpoint, even if you don't agree with them, you probably felt, you no longer get genuinely angry at them. A debate or two is not worth breaking the relationship -- it bridges! 

Stories are the ones that we humans are genuinely interested in. For the logical (including AI), they wanted facts instead. You see, facts don't made stories. Facts are just true, undisprovable data that states; but who except the few Sherlock Holmes like would be entertained by data? Imagine fiction books merely states data: It's proven that the green apple eaten by (who is it again) contains the chemical (whatever the name is) that'll cause your body to misfunction, shutting it down. End of story. The rest of the plot? Nope, they're not factual, so they're "not important". We need stories. Our life is a story to tell -- an biography, autobiography. What's the meaning of _your_ life? They goes into that book. What do you aim for? Why did you take particular actions instead of other options? What consequences do you bear? What responsibility do you partake? They shape the stories about you. Even the stories that, when we reminisced, are painful, complicated, even shameful. 

When we're curious about others, we'll do "**generous listening.**" We let the other person do the speaking. Don't complete the sentence for them. Don't assume things by putting yourself in their shoes, or 'based on your experience'. Sometimes, it's worthy to be surprised by what words they used to describe -- and we want to find out about the terms of the words, because its terms, i.e. the definition, might not be what most people agree with. Example, when one was young in high school, people use "study" as "revision", but for me, one distinguished them separately. Revision is revise, to go through things you've learnt one more time. Study is research, to try to find out what you're curious about, to answer the hypothesis that you gave to it. Sometimes, _we don't want to have an answer immediately_, to let the questions dangle in our head as we think about it for the upcoming days and weeks and months and years. We search slowly, we experience, and we compare with our experience -- rather than take a vote, accept an answer, and move on, forgetting about it. 

These are just a few learnings about 'words' that one extracted. For more, you should look back at the passages. All in all, these learnings on words sounded most like "wisdom" to one than the rest of the chapter, perhaps because they're words most like self-help books that you read about. One more short example: we pretend and deny things that happen when they're loss, when they're not happening to us, or when they're not happening as we expected them to happen -- we pushed them aside, hoping to face them in the future (if need be), and use disruptions/distractions to get on with life. 

There are also things one don't understand about. Example: poetry. At this point in life, one can't yet appreciate poetry, don't yet understand poetry, and can't fathom poetry yet. So it's hard for one to relate to the poetry part other than words arranged in special ways. Sometimes, they're made so clear it jingles, aha! Other times, they're just bland. 

Next up is **flesh**, or 'body'. Why do we live in the moment? Because we can only live in the moment, not the past, not the future. The hours spent ruminating over the past, reliving life in the past; the hours spent dreaming about the future; they're lost. Nope, one never says it's not important to plan for the future, one only said that the time spent thinking about the future (therefore living in the future) is lost time. Two such statements can co-exist independently. 

When it comes to body, we first think about pleasure, for what senses do we have other than our inner receptors? The taste of food, the touch of objects or another person's skin (one is deprived from hugging someone else), the magnificent, awestruck sight, the alluring smell, the pleasant chirp of birds. Perhaps _beauty_ is present more when we feel more alive. And we get fulfillment from our body via challenges. Challenge your body to go over your perceived limit (but not its limit) [1], and when you relax thereafter, it's comparable to a relaxing puff of smoke, a puff of marijuana, a drink of alcohol, and other 'high' moments you adhered to. 

As usual, these are the writings to author about beauty, but unfortunately, one cannot relate. One therefore suspend judgment. One don't have the choice to disagree (because 没有资格): you can only disagree with things you understand, you cannot disagree with things you don't understand. **Trying to do so means disrespecting the author.** Similarly, we cannot help other people with their pain if we don't know what to do with our own pain. Trying to do so means expecting them to do what we expect ourselves cannot do. If we hide our pain and distract it, the best we could help others is to hide theirs and help them distract it. Words comes more easy than actions. "Pain isn't static: it only didn't change if we refuse to look at it."

Other people are not 'problems to solve' -- we're there to 'be together'. 

Next comes **love.** "That something is difficult must be one more reason for us to do it." 

> Love: a merger of pleasure and risk and sacrifice. A dance of alternative vulnerabilities. A wellspring of joy. A challenge to endless learning by mistake. The moment to moment evolution of care. 

The "love" we defined by society in the 20th and 21st century today are too narrow. Even narrower, we may be looking "to be loved" than "to love". Love is there, and it's up to us to make it real. Individualism and freedom cannot produce love: you need to be with each other, and when you're with each other, you cannot have freedom -- sometimes, you must give up freedom and let others define you when you're with others. And only when you mingle with others can you create a relationship; and with a relationship you can have love. As long as we want freedom, and one is guilty of that, we care only about our ego, our 'self'. We can only care about others, and hence love others, when we put down the 'self'. Sure, it's not as simple as that -- there are "self-love" and the like. The world is complicated; you'll have to learn how to live in such complications and understand from multiple perspectives. One no longer believes in the "theory of everything", the one theory or one way to rule them all. In different situations, in different cases, we act differently and give different solutions that have no relationship whatsoever. Even in the same situation, we can act differently that seems to clash with each other (in the eyes of those that strives for simplicity and straightforwardness) but it's entirely ok -- the clash is normal. You just have to live with it, don't try to simplify it. 

Something one noted, "to notice race is bad, so let's _not_ notice it anymore." We mentioned it before: because we cannot face it, we ignore it, distracted us, assuming things didn't happened, didn't exist. 

The near enemy to compassion and love is _sorrow_. It feels like empathy, but without hope. Change comes about in part, by conversation in the old fashioned sense with others. The word calls for responsibility. There are things happening in the past we can't change; we can only sit in and face the enduring pain. 

Then comes **faith.** Personally, perhaps this is the most difficult to understand, because one isn't religious (well, one is religious to science, if you will). The thing is, faith is faith, it's not religion. You can be non-religious but have faith, and let's hope not vice versa. A lot of these one cannot understand, but let's note down some of what one can. Example: we don't need to have answers to everything, we can live with the questions, and with people by our side, we can have faith that we can continue living without figuring it all out. To me, faith feels more like hope, but hope is another chapter in the book, though one can't distinguish which from which. 

Second, _discovery leads to more ignorance._ That one can understand: the more answers you find, the more questions you ask. And author mentioned, "The opposite of faith is not doubt. **The opposite of faith is certainty.**" Therefore, always live with the uncertain, as one fathomed the moral of the story. 

Third, "**Where is it written that you're supposed to be happy all the time?**" Now that sentence struck one as, Eureka! We live in the average always, and our brain always push us back to average. After we win a lottery, we are happy a few days, and it's lost. After we win some competition, the same. After we feel sad about the loss of a child, the same (but perhaps it's not days but weeks or months of sadness and depression). Our brain always push us back to equilibrium, where we don't feel negative, but neither do we feel happy. Just meh, bland. 

Lastly, **hope.** Author defines hope with a lot of definitions, and one of it is to stick with reality, not with fantasy. We cannot _hope_ to fly, because we don't have wings. We can _hope_ to sit on an airplane and let it fly us somewhere -- that's reality. 

Then, author mentioned something one agrees with: teaching young people that they can _quickly_ get out of the darkness and get into some much more pleasant situation. "What we need are more and more people standing in the darkness, not run away..." We don't always hope for progress: we could hope for decline. "Hope is brokenhearted on the way to becoming wholehearted." 

Things will go wrong, due to fragility, as stated by Nassim Taleb in Antifragile. And we need to acknowledge that what we build will go wrong, and some of them that don't go wrong during their lifetime (perhaps due to restricting how you can use it, protected it from hackers and all that if it's software side), they'll expires, outlives their usefulness. **Resilience** means expecting adversity, swapping wish-based optimism for reality-based hope. So when we build something, we should think how it can "fail gracefully", that is, if it fails, don't let it bring down the others (making it independent as much as possible). 

"Critical thinking without hope is cynicism, hope without critical thinking is naïveté." 

Wisdom emerges when we have to hold opposite force that interplays: birth and death exist simultaneously, as does pain and hope, mystery and conviction, calm and buoyancy, etc. 

---

So all in all, life is difficult. The wisdom of life is not to seek to avoid the difficulty in life, but to face it head to head when they dump a problem at us. We should expect to struggle in life, not live life smoothly through. 

The only problem (in one's **opinion**) one found with this book is author's conversation, sometimes but not every time. And sometimes, it appears to the person author is speaking to as well. E.g. completing the other's sentences -- how does she know what the others really want to say that? It's better to just wait it out for an elongated pause. And also, the changing of the topic quite quickly makes following quite difficult. As if she was trying to fit everything she wants to include into the discussion window, like she had an agenda to get over all her questions first and perhaps only look back later. One would prefer a more curious conversation that continues along the line of conversation rather than an abrupt switching of topics. E.g. way of switching topics is the guy/gal is talking about something, then suddenly something pop into your head and you feel the urge to mention it, then the other person either change topic (if you prompt so) or continue along their line, so person A is talking something but person B is talking another thing, each trying to finish their side, not communicating to each other, only to themselves. Of course, this is one's opinion and preferences rather than a fact. But perhaps it's just author's way of doing things: sometimes, she spoke stuffs that she seems to catch what the others is speaking about, so perhaps she's listening after all, even without the prompting deeper kind of curiosity questioning most of the time. 

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 

### Notes: 
[1] If you do "ma bu" (马步), you first feel sore in your upper part of the leg muscles. Then, you started to feel pain thereafter if you don't give up too quickly. Then, you'll feel a little bit numb as pain started to give up. Then, your muscles grew weaker and weaker, and you start to go lower and lower until you reached the floor. A lot of people gave up at the "sore" part -- which is their "perceived limit" but not their "actual limit". Of course these steps aren't universal to everyone. Depending on the type of "ma bu" you do, if you stand not on your feet but on your toetips, when you feel pain, your feet also keeps vibrating as your muscles tried to shake off the acid that builds up. If you therefore change from toetips to legs, the muscle that strain goes from the lower leg back muscle to the upper leg forward muscle, and that starts straining. And when you stand back up, it'll continue shaking the lower leg back muscles. 