### 4,000 Weeks By Oliver Burkeman
afterthought

One year is 52 weeks, 10 years is 520, 80 years is 4160 weeks [1], approximately 4000 weeks. In the blink of an eye, we're 20 years old. In another blink of an eye, our children (if you have one) is 20 years old. In another blink of an eye, you'd be saying your final words, recalling all the regrets you had done (or more probably, not done due to lack of courage, or due to too many 'if only' and 'one will have one's chance in the future'), and goodbye, world. 

In fact, this book took me one week to read. And you know what, 1 out of 4000 weeks is gone! One don't read books when one's baby; but say, if you start reading at age 20, read around 3,000 books and yeah, be prepared to pass away we are at any time. Life is short. 

Some months ago, earlier this year, one started translating a video game into a book (not yet finished, but almost!). The game was Xenoblade Chronicles 3. At the end of Chapter 1, one of the main character, Mio, brought out her diary and wrote in it. That revives one's habit of keeping a diary. In fact, one actually do keep a diary when one was younger, but at that time, one don't know what to write in one's diary, so one only recorded down what cartoon one watches every day. It was just one or two lines, honestly. Later on, when one don't watch cartoon everyday anymore, one only record when one watches cartoon. And gradually, there was a time one only watch cartoon in cycles (some time of the year, say, summer, one watches cartoon, and other times like winter, one don't, for example), so one totally no more recording after so long and the habit had gone. 

But now, diary took on a new form. One no longer go to school and study whole day long -- which wasn't worth recording, in one's memory. It's nothing special to one; it's _forced_ upon one, be it one like or don't like the study. And one seldom record the events during break time, which was way too short; one only really had time to finish one's food. And secondary school was a lonely period with 'no' friends. (Actually, one got, but it wasn't very interesting. In fact, one also had friends in primary school, but mostly we play chess. One defines meaningful as having deep talks; and do children even do deep talks? Do teenagers even do deep talks? The latter maybe, but one hadn't yet met someone that does so in one's secondary school. Perhaps part of my fault, part of environment's fault.) 

We'd diverted there. Let's repeat. Diary took on a new form, yes. After school, one had more time to do what one want. One didn't work in a firm that requires one to be ready 24/7, so that's great. Plus, because one finally learn how to learn oneself (more on this when one finish the book "How to Read a Book") during college, rather than being spoonfeed, one can read a lot of books. Plus, Mio said, "To live, and learn, a whole lot more." And that carved deep into one's heart. So nowadays, one sometimes can, surprisingly, write more than a single A4 pages on the lined notebook. The days that one wrote only a few lines? It was when there was 'nothing' worth writing -- which means, one was so addicted to playing a game that one did nothing else, and games are worth nothing in the long run, except Xenoblade Chronicles's story (the game itself also not worth writing, only the cutscenes worth golden). Normally, one don't write that long, perhaps half a page or one-third of a page, usually about what one read that day, a summary. And, oh boy, one had this problem author said on cannot stay till the end of reading a book. Perhaps because some book one started, found it not interesting, so one abandon it 'for the moment' (which, if it stays abandon for too long, one'll totally abandon it, of course), and start another book. After all, that may or may not be wrong, be it how you see. On one hand, one isn't finishing what one start. On the other hand, one **does not have to** finish what one start -- because life is too short, and one rather focus it on what's more interesting and more useful and more great a book than mundane and uninteresting ones. Right? Right? Right? And if one watch some useful (non-dopamine video), one also record down what one had learn from there. And one subscribe to one or two weekly newslater (one is Postantly, one don't remember when one subscribe that, but sometimes it send useful stuffs, other times it send contradicting stuffs that one have to decide whether to take the advice or not; the other shorter one being Farnam Street fs.blog). Plus, since one translate Xenoblade almost daily, one also write anything down worth recording. Sometimes, they speak words that's worth recording, you know. Other times, one admit, they spoke false myth -- which is what our society agree today, but our society as a whole does not know what we believe on that is actually wrong, when put under scientific testing (or even non-scientific testing). The belief is "we believe it's so, our brain tease us to think it's so, but practically, it doesn't work out that way." And of course, we had a lot of those; or author won't be writing this book. Just look at all the self-help book on time management that aren't like author's and you'd know about it -- seemingly useful _theoretically_; but coming to action, nope. 

One actually gave up multi-tasking long ago; and propose on Deep Work. But after some time (1-2 years), the environment take over when one don't exert effort. And today, one have problem of not changing task frequently -- that is, reading a sub-chapter of a book, then swap to the dopamine Chinese Novel that's more addictive. What it leaves one brain with, one observed, is, if you use one's [chinese novel reductor](https://github.com/Wabinab/chinese-novel-word-reductor) that reduce one page to just a few sentences (because most people write partial sentence, or too short a sentence, then press enter; rather than writing a proper paragraph like how this article is written, mostly because they can't understand how to write a paragraph, but also because they're too impatient, both the writer and the reader, to read paragraphs), when you press "next chapter" too often, your eyes start skimming through. In "How to Read a Book", author mentioned that your brain catch more than your eyes can catch. By that, one meant that, when your eyes focus, it doesn't immediately turn into an image in your conscious. It first turns into signals in subconscious, do some post-processing, only it renders in conscious mind. You **actually can read a book without letting it renders in your conscious mind**, by letting your brain process the words in subconscious and decide whether it's worth a read or not. And for an addictive book, your brain will do that same. Because the word reductor reduces the book of bad writers to so short (just averaged 3 sentences, splitted as 3 'paragraphs') that they can be fit into a single page (of a 2K large-width monitor), you don't even need to press space to scroll down the page", you can easily press next to jump to next page/chapter, and your brain can so quickly process the items that only when it thinks it's worth rendering it render the sentence, you'll find yourself pressing "arrow right" key so often that your brain starts to overheat. Do it for 100 chapter/pages and you start to overload your dopamine. That's when you start getting headache due to too fast a reading. The antidote is find a non-fiction book by a great writer, and read it **slowly** -- that is, having run through skimming so fast, you now need to focus your eyes word by word, sentence by sentence, paragraph by paragraph, and slow down your reading indefinitely. Do that for a few page and your tempo will reduce back to non-headache level. If, instead, you didn't do that, and continue on with your speed skimming, you'll reach a point when it no longer give you enough dopamine that you quit; but once you quit, you'll find an abyss in your heart, like that of a drug's withdrawal symptom, and nothing can fill the void, not even if you take drugs, nor switching to another social media can help. You had reached max dopamine receptivity. Producing more dopamine wouldn't help when you don't have enough receivers to receive more. And one'll stop there -- you should experiment it yourself, if you want to. 

And yes, doing nothing is really difficult. Sitting there and daydream is not, actually. Plus, if it is, you'd be punching the material you're sitting on. For example, one usually punch one's bed when one's doing meditation, because one can't stop; but if one's brain is kept thinking, it's fine for one to stay calm until it stop thinking. The "thinking" one meant is uncontrolled thinking -- that whatever it comes up, one let it flow, and not taking part in it nor controlling it forcefully. 

There's a topic on cosmic insignificance. In fact, one think one understood it too early, probably. When you understand it, you no longer want to search for work, because they're mostly meaningless. When you do, and when one do, one found it utterly boring and motivationless. The job had to convince one that it's worth doing, then only we consider whether it pays enough for one to rear oneself plus paying one's tuition debt (which will take longer than paying back house mortgage in my dad's Gen X era, urg... Will there be a revolution on salary, so it rise at least as fast as inflation and payment, rather than this broken overpriced tuition fee, overpriced home mortgage, overpriced everything, all except your salary? Because the rich want to squeeze in more profit for themselves, and at most, for their stock/bond buyers?) 

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 

### Notes: 
1. If you're nerds, you'd use days to do the calculation, so $\frac{365.25 \times 80}{7} \approx 4174$ weeks. 