# Generations By Bobby Duffy
afterthought

Some special situation allowed one to read this book. But that's not all -- if it isn't interesting, even if put into a special situation, one wouldn't be able to finish it as fast as one wanted to. "Interesting" and "useful" is the key to finish a book fast, and "uninteresting" and "useful" is the key to finish a book slow, while "uninteresting" and "not useful" is the key to put down a book and move on with life. 

One first heard of generations when one was young, but one can't remember when. When told, yeah, you're from Gen Z, what is even Gen Z? Oh, so there's Baby Boomer, X, Y, and Z. OK, but what are they? What are their differences? One didn't thought about that back then, just knowing that, one is Z, my parents should be Y, and my grandpa X. Not true though, my grandpa is Baby Boomer, to be sure, and my parents X, and myself Z, so there's a missing Y in between. But that's another story. This book brought out the differences being seen from 3 different perspectives: period, lifecycle, and cohort. 

These all you could read yourself. For one, reading just a few chapters of the book, one already feel the stone weighting into one. The situation is probably global, one don't know, and how much it applies to each country, one also didn't research about it; but certainly, one can feel it, even if it's not measured statistically, but to what extent, one don't know. And when he spoke about, say, salary increase much slower [1] than the price of item going up. Example, we're especially depressed by the cost of housing -- not just owning a house, but even renting a house is a pain. No wonder some go homeless. In the past, you may have to pay mortgage for X years, but now, perhaps 2X or 3X or 4X years, before it's completed. 

And if that's difficult, previously, there's a book one read, called Excellent Sheep, that spoke about student debt. In the past, government or school helped out by decreasing the price you have to pay; nowadays, the price stays the same, but you can get loan or scholarship to decrease the price in the now, and for loan, you're sacrificing your future's dreams for the now. So, our first thing is focusing on finishing one's student debt. Depending on how much you earn, in one's case, it'll take one 10 years just to finish paying student debt, and by then, one would still be empty handed, not able to afford a house around age 30. And if mortgage would take 40 years to finish, perhaps one might have a house for oneself by age 70? That is, if one could live till that age and not die early. 

Do we even have a future? 

There's another chapter that talks about people having sex less often, or delayed sex to an older period. One see that more of an advantage rather than a disadvantage, really. The thing is, there are too _much_ people nowadays. Yes, we still have enough resources (food, water, electricity, energy, etc.) to support such ecosystem, but these are fragile, and how long can we maintain them? One don't know, to be sure. Perhaps you could maintain them for long, provided there's no disruption. But if there's some flu that wipe out some crops or animals, then we're in danger of starvation. In the past, starvation had helped keep the numbers low, even when families give birth to a lot of children. Women try to not bear children, for human, giving birth have high death probability, while giving birth is as easy as pooping (no-constipation type) in apes, because baby human have large head that can't come out easily. Plus, it puts women unable to work effectively during that period. 

But let's get back to the topic. In the past, you can give birth to 10 children, but most of them would die prematurely before age of 5, and that keeps the suriving rate [2] low, hence population low. Plus, food hadn't been so consistently available. Some drought or flood, not to say more serious natural disasters, could easily wipe out a lot of food, and starvation increase the death rate higher than surviving rate. Nowadays, we have ways to prevent children from dying so easily before the age of 5, and we celebrated that. Even more, we have ways to churn more food to rear our populations, so that reduces the death rate due to starvation. Of course, that excludes the "Third World", to be honest, or there wouldn't be so much food wasted instead of redistributed. That causes the population explosion. 

Nowadays, our nuclear family no longer have that many children, knowing that we don't need so many anymore, plus rearing a children become more expensive as they're no longer an asset in the fields, but became liabilities, having to paid for schooling instead. That keeps the birth rate low. But that's not enough, we can't know if our system can supply so many people nowadays for how long. We can't be sure. To be honest, after COVID, except the printing money causing prices of products to go up (because money depreciates), meat had been smaller. Pork had been more bony, rarely had meat, a sign of killing small pigs (either prematurely, or the change in species to a smaller one). Eggs have been smaller (one don't know the logic for this). If it's really a sign of premature killing, it just shows that supply can no longer meet demand, for if we have time to let them grow big before slaughtering, why slaughter them before? Increasing food supply and all that is not a stable solution, so the only way is to decrease the number of people, and if we don't want the current people to suffer (like mass massacre, or starvation, or whatever method to decrease population that's not "ethical" according to our current era's definition of ethics), it would mean keeping birth rate lower than death rate. 

Cultural war is half real. For example, our parents usually had a different idea than us, because they did something wrong, regret it, and want us to not pay for the same mistakes they did. What they didn't know is that isn't possible, because time had changed, situation had changed, and the lessons they learnt most probably aren't applicable anymore, unless they're timeless (which is rare and difficult to find, so don't keep your hopes too high, but keep in mind of checking for any if they did come up accidentally by wisdom). The thing is, they think they know the truth, the younger one can't know the truth without experiencing it oneself (wisdom can't be told, it had to be failed and experienced to learn), so no one could refute one another in the best case; in the worst case, both hold that they're both right and therefore started the generational war of disagreeing with one another. 

In the end, the author had some suggestions, but one would like you to pick up the book and read it yourself than hearing one talking about it. Plus, one don't like to repeat what's in the book anyways, and afterthought is meant to speak about what thoughts arise from one that's distinct from what one read, honestly speaking. From this onwards, if one don't find the book interesting or doesn't have much to say, one would no longer write an afterthought about it. 

[Find me at Upwork](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 

### Footnotes: 
1. One saw it somewhere, one don't know where (one think it's from Ray Dalio's analysis?), that the richer you are, the more your salary increase over the timeframe. E.g. rich people might have salary increased by 300% from time X to time Y, while middle-income only 200%, and low income 100%, and say, inflation, perhaps 150%. 
2. "Birth rate", one defines as "the frequency of birth, alive or dead". While "surviving rate" is "the frequency of surviving after birth, to an age of, say, 5". So, a children can be born dead but contribute to the birth rate. 