# Excellent Sheep by William Deresiewizc
afterthought

Seriously, one don't even realize! That itself is already a problem. After finishing the book, one can see the struggle of making friends, because people are so absorbed in their work, using work as an excuse so much to the point of abuse, that it discourages you to even go out with them. Perhaps it's because one don't know who to find, yes. Or perhaps, it's because one approach them at the wrong timing, and that's possible. Because one believe, regardless of what day of the year it is, and under what situation, unless you're in a _real_ crisis (and exam and homework and work and study is **not** a crisis. You got cheated by your partner, yes. You got cheated by some scammers, yes. Your relatives passed away, yes. But **not and never** exams.), one shouldn't prevent oneself from pursuing the ultimate goal of life -- making friends. 

It's a benefit and a curse. Knowing too early that one'll not want to put work as no. 1 means one had totally no motivation to climb any rung of ladder, and that put one at a disadvantage when finding work. _Creating_ a job is another thing -- because you don't have to see other people's (a.k.a. recruiter's) faces, but that's also kinda disadvantaged. Ignore the capital we need, the idea is more important. If we can't even come up with an idea that make products/services where people want to buy, no point having lots of capital to start. And if we know the idea, we can think about how to get the capital. Retarded as one was, one hadn't yet know what one want to sell except one's talents. 

Getting back to the curve. It's difficult to see how much disadvantage college life is. The thing is, when you're not an outsider, you're an insider, it's hard to see from another perspective. Plus, if you're currently out of college, like one is, trying to retrieve from one's fallible memory is futile. How do one know one really is recalling the correct thing? So far one can recall, one knows that it's difficult to make friends, despite (not all out but quite huge, unfortunately) effort on going out to try and fail and try again. Even extracurricular activities. When people said they cancel last minute because they need to work, one'd be like... Similarly for volunteering, one'd met that kind of people who commit and couldn't come because they stupidly commit more than they can do. Bro, couldn't you predict whether you can take it on, how much time you have first, before you even commit? **Such lack of responsibility!** 

And that's what one wants to mean, and what author wants to mean as well. We have universities that give us 2nd chance so we don't have to hold ourselves accountable. E.g. my university used to have some "rebate" (one can't remember the exact word) feature where, if you fail to get 40 on one course, you can pull your average mark up back with another course you did good. Say, you have one you got 33 mark, which is short of 40; but you had another you got 80, so $\frac{80 + 33}{2} = 56.5$ is larger than 40. And you can do that for 2 courses (modules) per year, and 3 throughout your undergrad (3 years). How lenient that is. Alas, with great liberty come great responsibility; if we only get the freedom to do stuffs without understanding how to take responsibility, we are sure to fail, sure to fall. 

Recently, one's younger brother graduated, and one heard one of his friends got First class (equivalent to an A, including A- and A+, in the U.S.). Then what? His mom started to invite everyone to party. No, it's not him inviting others, his arrogance hadn't reached that level yet. It's his mom's arrogance to spread the news, welcome everyone to have KFC or something over a grand feast, to celebrate her son getting a First. God, what do those mom's where their son don't get First? What would they have thought? Envious? And most importantly, your son got First is your son's, not yours, what for you do the invitation? To fill your empty hearts? When author mentioned, parents overprotected their kids, whether via extreme care (that even they falling down they react like crazy), or via extreme 'discipline' (forcing you to study or play the piano from day to night), it's because they have something within themselves that they can't fulfill, and they impose it on their children, even unknowingly of themselves doing it. To reach the level of realization is another whole point that most people can't do it. If they can, they would've changed their behavior, for their own family is under their control, whatever the world think about them. 

Talking about outer voice, one can't understand why people worry so much on what other people say. First, if it's not your friends (or higher relationship), you **don't have to care.** The snuff they go with their saying, and you can keep your skin thick as the Wall of China. If they're your friends or higher, it depends on what they say. Does their statement of help to you? The thing is, as human, we sometimes **don't understand what we're saying/doing,** so we can't say that what they say are always right. And since they're not always right, if they give us advice, we need to kept scrutiny high. They say, oh, because that loses face. You ask, oh, does face going to bring me any benefit? Yes, they say, you're going to be welcomed in the group. And one ask, is being welcomed in the group more important, to pursuing your dreams more important? Remember, you can't have both. You can either pursue your dreams, leaving the people who held you back behind (which, eventually, when they got used to it, they'll come back, because friends stay friends unless you directly snuff at them and break the relationship, either one of you), or you can stay with them and live with the pang in your stomach, the pang in your lungs, the pang in your heart, and use Panadol (a painkiller brand) for the rest of your life, because you decided to be a coward and never pursue it for mingling with those holding you back than wishing the best of you. One can't even tell whether they're your friends or your barricade. 

One used to asked one's professor more about life than work. They're refusant, actually. Not to say totally not, but kept it minimal. In essence, meeting with students were kept to work, and when one tried to divert a little just to know more about them, it'd been met with barriers. The word 'professor' had told you a lot. If they'd like to kept you as half teacher half friend (亦师亦友), they'd allow you to call them by their names in the very least, or more informally, "bro". 

In the end, if one's going back to school, one hope, seriously hope, one can attend something more lenient, some school where one's professors would care about one, the school won't be that big, won't pursue profit relentlessly, and the students would be more curious and friendly than immersed in never-ending work that they get themselves into. What do one mean by getting themselves into? It's not the school passing you relentless amount of work, actually. They're doable. It's that, when you know you already have these much work, you still take on more, decide to fill every second of your life, scared to do nothing. Worse, as one mentioned earlier, to take on more than you can commit, _irresponsibly_ leaving others in ashes by heartlessly apologizing, and repeat it again because you never understood your mistake of taking too much and still laugh at it, continue to take too much. 

[Find me at Upwork](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 