# Afterthought: Civilization and Capitalism Vol 1: The Structure of Everyday Life by Fernand Braudel
afterthought history

Excellent writing! Siân Reynolds, the translator, had not eliminated the liveliness and simplicity in the original French writing. One hope to complete reading the French version too, but that will take much much much longer time, given my level of French. Yet, one found that this French writing is not very difficult to understand, even with my basic and broken French, with minimal use of Google Translate! That's what determines a good writing. 

This book really offers an insight into the "everyday life", as it promised, unlike normal history books that focused on the unusual. These "everyday life" were really rare to made it into histories; yet they were what we would like to know more about, for what govern most of us are the "everyday" than the "exceptional" or "unusual." It allows us to make comparison of theirs with ours. It allows us to understand how wrongs the situations are depicted in TV series, dramas, as they faded away from the everyday life histories. 

It's impossible for one to list out everything here, not even generally; for every single huge chapter were split into sub chapters and sub sub chapters. These sub-sub-chapters, each had displayed common themes amongst different countries while also make differentiations, what made them unique. The countries targeted isn't necessarily in Europe, though that's mostly focused on. Where reference weren't clear, the author mostly referred to France, his home country. 

Overall, there's not much to write against this writing, as one enjoyed the journey the author took one through his books in each of the different dimensions mentioned. One do have to say, chapter 1 is less appealing to one than the other chapters though; but the urge to read on, seeing chapter 2's title "Bread", makes one curious; so one persisted. 

[One now offers casual writing service to the public. Check it out!](https://www.fiverr.com/s/D84XrA)