# Successful Aging By Daniel Levetin
afterthought health longevity

This book, also called _The Changing Mind_ before it changes name, is about how to extend your health span, and hopefully, your life span. 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

The book started off with lots of scientific teachings, biology [1] in general, about how the mind works. When author set out to write the book, he had 3 questions in mind: 
1. What can we do to maintain strength of body, mind, and spirit while coming to terms with the limitations that aging can bring? 
2. What can we learn from those who age joyously, remaining vital and engaged well into their 80s, 90s, and even beyond? 
3. How do we adapt our culture to service the needs of aging generations, while also taking greater advantage of their wisdom, experience and motivation to contribute to society? 

In essence, what the author tried exploring relates to how you can live to an old age without getting dumber and dumber, retaining your mental faculties as if you're still young. And 'retain' includes reduce the probability of catching Alzheimer's and dementia and the like that confiscates your mental ability. Then, what can we do in old age that ensure we don't live in pain and loneliness, but child's play? Remember the times when you're out there with a group of people playing hide and seek, free of all pains and temporarily forget your homeworks and classworks? Then, author also tries looking into the usefulness of old age people. Despite confiscated physical abilities, if they can retain mental faculties, they're still contributing to the society until the very end of their life. We should not discard them as useless; in fact, we should not consider them an asset, for 'asset' refers to an object, not a human that have one's liberty. We should think they're like us (if you're still young and able), not a lesser mind, and capable of doing things mentally (and physically, determined by the extent of their physical health), just like us. 

Brain don't stop developing, not until you end your life. Though, the development of faculties into their full potential ended in the late 20s; so what can we say, in our 30s, about the 'innocent' periods of age 18-21 (when we first reach 'adult' classification, or even 16 in some countries)? Well, nothing we can do about that, because our brain hadn't yet fully develop, so we're still innocent then. 

You know what? INFP ENTJ those kinds of 16 combinations, they're not scientifically proven, had no scientific basis, and often, when you retake the test, got different results, esp. if you choose 'in the middle' for most of the questions. Other test also had difficulty testing, for we act differently under different circumstances. Nevertheless, the _Big Five_ is scientifically proven, and it shows "percentage" that you'll act in that spectrum rather than the other in a given situation. Or perhaps, you act more in that spectrum because the situation you meet requires you to act in that spectrum. Let's look at the 5 dimensions first before one give an example on that. 
1. **Extraversion**. High score means comfortable around people, start conversations, and don't mind being the center of attention. 
2. **Agreeableness**. Highs core means interested in other people, sympathize with others' feelings, and make people feel at ease. 
3. **Conscientiousness**. HIgh score means prepared, diligent, pay attention to details, and do what you say you'll do. 
4. **Emotional Stability vs Neuroticism**. High score means not easily bothered by things, relaxed, and don't change one's moods a lot. 
5. **Openness to Experience**. High score means quick to understand things, have vivid imagination, like trying new things, going to new places. Enjoy intellectual, cultural, aesthetic, and artistic experiences. 

**Example:** you may rate high on extraversion because you live in a society that requires you to converse, or else you raise your probability of dying. This is true in a country where law enforcement are weak, and hence society fall back on moral support by forming groups within the citizens, to protect each other within the group against harm. So when you take the test, it'll say you rate high on extraversion (which **not** necessarily means you're an extrovert). Then, say, you move to a country that has good security and no longer need such extraversion, no longer need such groups. Now, you close your door and happily be by yourself. You're said to have low extraversion when you take the test. We can't say whether you're an introvert or extrovert, because the tag you put on yourself depends on whether you like to be with people or not; rather, 'extraversion' is the action that you take in different situations and environments that is independent of your personality. And hence, your Big Five may change. 

Author then look into genes and age-related personality changes that affects your Big Five. Yes, on average, you're more open as you grow up, until around adolescent, then as things get rigid, you're less and less open to new experiences. But of course, individuals could take measures to go against the grain; that's just the average for those who didn't take actions. And of course, personality before we reach adult is called 'temperament'; don't know why author split the terms, though. But basically, he said that 'temperament' is not determined by ourselves but by our parents, guardians, and the environment it exposes to us during young age. And because children learn faster than later age, and they're a blank piece of paper by then, temperament is the initial drawing we painted on to them. And also, animal's personality is also called temperament. They're related to the big 5 via different wordings, in respective orders:
1. Surgency
2. Sociability
3. Self-Regulation
4. Sanity (this is difficult to measure)
5. Curiosity

And of course, author then explain what give good health. Example, openness and curiosity correlate highly with good health and long life. Your willingness to try something new later determines how healthy you'll live. Does that not? Logically, it exercises our brain! Of course, too much of anything can cause trouble. Too much conscientiousness and you develop OCD. Too much openness may put you in danger, engaging in risky behaviors. 

Then, though author didn't mention much about this repeatedly, but he meant it, the **biggest choices that impact our lives are COACH principles: Curiosity, Openness, Association (i.e. sociability), Conscientiousness, and Healthy**. Oh, and a 6th: **memory.** 

Of course, we'll skip the biology terminology and stuffs in this afterthought. Let's discuss something not. **Wisdom**, author defined, is _the ability to see patterns where others don't see them, to extract generalized common points from prior experience, and use those to make predictions about what's likely to happen next._ Old people, having experienced more (if they really experience more, with exceptions of course), tend to have more wisdom. Of course, wisdom also have negatives -- if something that used to work no longer works, such wisdom would bring disaster if you don't make alterations. Other stuffs that don't change, though, wisdom put to good use. 

Memory system, though we classify them under one word, had different terms. Short-term memory differ from long-term memory; subconscious memory differ from conscious ones; etc. Short term memory are easily forgotten when your attention shifts, for example. Subconscious memory is training your body until it react subconsciously without registering in your conscious, like Kung Fu blocking some attacks before you could think about it. Long-term memory seems vivid and can preserve for long; but they're not without faults. Every time we read it, we're capable of writing into it. Say, we want to recall a happy moments when we feel sad. Alas, that 'sadness' permeates into the original memory, so the next time you fetch it, you not only feel the 'happiness' from the initial register, but also the 'sadness' from the last time you'd read (and write onto) it. These things happen without you knowing, without you controlling, alas. Hence, that's why we say our memories are prone to huge distortions. When a police ask you to say what you see, the first time you might be unsure whether or not you had see something correctly; but as more police ask you to repeat the scene again and again, something that's unsure will solidify based on your 'logic' guessing the highest probability, and when they last ask you, you'll say "you did see" with strong confidence. Alas, common sense is usually common nonsense; and you don't even know you're speaking nonsense until someone point it out; your brain had tricked you, put a barrier between your curiosity and memory, so you don't doubt. But when someone point it out, you and your brain are often surprised, then only are both of you willing to make alterations again, taking advantage of the doubt. 

Memory does not reside in a particular location in the brain. For more of this biology stuff, read the book. 

The key to remembering things is to get involved in them actively. If you just sit down and let words flow into your brain reading a book, it won't work. One does that too -- and that's because passively reading usually involves daydreaming. One read the words with one's eyes, but one's brain is elsewhere; and without one knowing, one'd already finished a few pages without registering anything. One had forgotten what one read, though one remembers what one daydream (at least for a short time before the short-term memory gets cleared away, if it's don't get registered in the long-term memory). To read a book and remember its contents, or to do any stuffs, any actions; you should perform it **actively, with attention**. Also, **do one thing at a time (mono-task)** -- multitask erodes memory. Attention means don't daydream. Particularly, reading with a pencil to jot down thoughts on the margins (marginalia) is an active action that helps remembering, that helps keep you focused on the reading than mind wandering. 

And of course, _some_ memory deteriorates with age; others get better with age. 

While one want to skip the biology, it's crucial to speak of something interesting here. Say, usually we have a hearing region in our brain that maps to our ears. What if we're deaf when we're born? The brain automatically maps the hearing region to another sensor. If we learn sign language as our mother tongue, we'll speak sign language as easy as who have another language (English, Chinese, etc.) as their mother tongue. Similarly, if someone is born blind and you teach brialle as the mother tongue, you touch the brialle as easy as one not blind reading their mother tongue. Our brain is just that flexible. 

There's another thing called "myelin" that's important to our brains. Author suggests eating fatty fish and get enough Vitamin B12. You'd have to be careful though, **not to eat in excess**; any thing in excess kills. Drink too much water and you can die of overdrinking; breathe too much 'pure' oxygen (esp. 100% oxygen; our atmosphere is only less than 30% oxygen at sea level, and even less than that on top of high mountains, if you don't already know) in terms of percentage can get us killed. Similarly, fish contains mercury, a poisonous substance that can kill you in large amounts. One don't know where the mercury come from, perhaps sea water? And yes, one don't know the side effects of congesting too much vitamin B12, but there's a limit, as with everything else having a limit too. It's Goldilocks zone: too little and you're deprived; too much and you're at risk. 

If you have **high blood presure**, restrict salt intake, learn to cope with stress, and perform aerobic exercise to lower blood pressure. 

Our brain _fills in_ missing information. The older we get, the more it does this. That's why we have optical illusions, and that's why the image we seen from a camera differ from if we see it directly with our eyes. Say, if we're close to a lightning source, we might first see the light (light travel faster than sound), then hear the sound, but we interpret we see and hear them at the same time, because our brain superimposes it. Knowing it doesn't change our brain's action: our brain still do what it does even if we know it's tricking us. 

To prevent cataract, it's best to start wearing sunglasses when outside at a young age. Though, some other research (not from the book) that one read said that, if you don't have enough sunlight (the non-UV part of it), your eyes can't grow fully -- and that leads to myopia; in contrary to what we used to believe, that babies used their eyes too much, or read things too close for an elongated time. More probably, they said, is because we don't ask them to watch YouTube under the morning sun. One isn't sure if sunglasses block the vital wavelength, though...

Hearing, don't hear loud noises, like in a disco. Eat antioxidant foods. Hallucination may cause tinnitus, a ringing in the ears, which is annoying, and affects lots of people. Tinnitus occur in the brain, not in the ear, though the experience told you not. Perhaps it might be the neurons that send random signals to the brain because they're damaged? Alas, we don't have the technology to treat neurons yet. Though, some hearing aids that provides some noise tuned to a particular person's need (it differs person to person) might cancel such random signals, hence calmed the ringings. 

Our skin had neurons that send input signals to our brain. That's why, when you touch your skin, you can feel it. When the neurons are damaged, you no longer can feel the touch of that part of the skin -- and touch includes scratching. Worse, because the neuron is damaged, it send the wrong signal, telling your brain you're feeling itchy/numb in that part of the skin; but because scratching no longer registers, it don't ease the itchiness. Using medicine may help in the beginning, but the more you use it, the more damaged it becomes, until it no longer helps. As of writing, there's no known cure, and few wiggly treatments that works for some but not others. 

Losing taste and smell, we may no longer enjoy our food. What makes food interesting is their taste and smell, are they not? And yes, malnutrition may occur when you lose your appetite. The more common is our sensitivity is no longer that sensitive in old age, so we need to congest much more amount of salt/sugar/whatever taste in order to register the taste. And of course, congesting in larger amounts is not good for our health; but if we don't congest in larger amounts, all just taste bland. 

Like memory, intelligence also have many branches, each differ from each other. The most common are IQ and EQ, but there are others like SQ (the ability to socialize with others; which differ from EQ in that you can read emotions well, but that doesn't mean you can socialize well with others.) The most accepted multiple intelligences is one suggested by Howard Gardner in _Frames of Mind_, which covers 10 intelligences. 
1. musical-rhythmic,
2. visual-spatial,
3. verbal-linguistic,
4. logical-mathematical,
5. bodily-kinesthetic (athleticism, dancing, acting),
6. interpersonal ("social")
7. intrapersonal (self-knowledge),
8. spiritual (religious),
9. moral (ability to solve problems within a moral and ethical frame), and 
10. naturalistic (knowledge of nature, plants, animals, et. to survive in the wilderness).

We're not necessarily strong in all, perhaps one or two is enough. And we may not excel on any, average on all. Gardner now considers whether he should add _teaching ability_ as the 11th intelligence. 

> _Never stop. Never stop growing. Never stop being curious. Never stop thinking that there's something you want to do that you haven't done. And do it!_

Life challenges are a road to wisdom development, and we need MORE of them: 
- _**m**astery_ (managing uncertainty and uncontrollability),
- _**o**penness,_
- _**r**eflectivity_, and 
- _**e**motion regulation_, including empathy. 

**Emotions** are short-term arousal of state that last from seconds to minutes; while **mood** is the emotions in the background, chronic. Sometimes, we misunderstood what we feel. If there's a beautiful lady across the bridge that joins two cliffs across an abyss kilometers deep, where a man is walking through, the man feels his heart jumping, thought it was the lady that made him want to mate with her; but what he's actually feeling is a fear of falling down, but he cannot relate, at least not with the lady at the other end waiting for him. And know what? **Only humans feel disgust.** Dogs and cats don't. Infants don't, not until they're age 3-7 did they develop the faculty to feel disgust; no wonder one ate someone else's fingernails when one was younger; no wonder one fell into the dirty drain one night, swam in it, and came out feeling soaked but not a tad of disgust, as far as one's memory can recall. One don't even know one was dirty, to be honest. 

Emotions may be scientific, reduced to the 'neurochemicals' presented in our bodies; but their interactions are so complex scientists can't trace them all. It's not just one or two that cause some feelings, but a lot of them, in different combinations (or perhaps, permutations), that caused so. 

And yes, stress is also an emotion. You could see stress biomarkers by testing for C-reactive protein (not all blood test administer this, usually one should request additional add-on for this), insulin, blood pressure, etc. Different people have different ways of reducing stress; and there are stress of different kinds. For one, conversations with someone who knows how to converse (yeah, you know those people that answer one word and get back to doing their things or to their screens??? Manners!!!) is enjoyable -- but it's not for everyone. And yes, if one feel stress because one isn't doing something for a long time (meaning, one feels one wasted time doing the 'wrong' things), doing the 'right' things will relieve one's stress to a big extent. The worse thing about stress is **it's cumulative.** You feel stress now, the 'trace' of that stress is written into your body and stays with you forever, shortening your life forever. And yes, a small amount of stress is healthy, which we call 'eustress'; it's like a vaccination that keeps the body healthy; it's why exercising keeps us healthy, by acutely stressing our bodies to use them than to leave them to rot. 

**Depression** often goes undiagnosed, and they're very, very bad in any age -- children, adults, old age, -- all the like. It's **NOT part of normal aging!!!** Depression should be treated. Insomnia is a hallmark of aging for many. To _prevent_ it, 3 resources are useful: 
- the presence of resources that some older adults enjoy (things that kept them from worrying -- e.g. sufficient financial support, and good health). 
- psychological resources (social support) to manage stress. 
- the role of meaningful engagement with other people, via social activities, volunteer work, or congregational religion. The presence of someone intimate. 

**Motivation** is important. Alas, profession don't shield us from being intellectually lazy -- many people stopped learning, don't have the motivation to keep up with changes in their fields. Of course, there are others in non-intellectual profession (like rubbish thrower or construction workers) that may keep learning into his/her old age. **Who's in charge of life?** Do you accept your fate that you can't change anything? Or do you take chance to put your will into action? No, it's not about predicting or planning your life -- action differs, and action is the one important. Plan/predict all you like and you may not do anything. And yes, **intrinsic motivation** is always more _powerful_ than extrinsic ones. We need to work hard to maintain motivations. Try new strategies, seek help from others when getting stuck. Don't let knowledge stagnate. 

Social stress is particularly harmful when it's long lasting, at any age. Children needs social interaction, family time, and group activities; if they play with tables, phones, and other electronic devices, they might get **higher probability of autism.** Social isolation is **often self-imposed**. Music can help; similarly with gratitude. "You don't need a playmate every day, but knowing you're valued and a contributing member of society is incredibly reaffirming." 

Time perspective, not chronological age, drives the changes in social motivation. Seeing you have infinite time, you aim for preparatory goal. Seeing you have finite time, you emphasize emotional states, seeking peace, well-being, and important friendships. That's why one recommend the 4,000 weeks book -- it lets you feel that, one week passed so fast, and doing it 4,000 times, you're in your graveyard. Then, you'll start understand that climbing the corporate ladder is really nothing if it's your graveyard waiting for you at the very top. And hence, enjoying only _after_ you get something or _after_ retirement is useless if you can't even confirm you'll live another day, what says another year!!! Face it, we're all at risk of dying from any kind of accidents -- esp. car accidents nowadays, but not limited to it. What, you're a perfect driver? Everyone thinks they're a perfect driver, and what comes to them? No, we're playing with fate. It's a close call this time, but your luck may not be that lucky next time. **Always, always prepare to die.** 

> **_Go outside, go outside, go outside!!!_** 

**Pain** adds up. It might not seem serious with one per se; but if everywhere you feel pain, your enjoyment of life starts deteriorate. For example, one feels back pain due to scoliosis. Per se, 'bone exercise' every day relieve the muscle stress, and one had to do it every day. On the rare 2% that it didn't work, one'll feel pain throughout the day, no matter how many times one did the 'bone exercise'. And yes, pressing it with one's hands makes it worse, because what used to be relievable by 'bone exercise' now not, until the next day with a good bed and a good night sleep, plus another 'bone exercise' the next morning. The worse thing isn't this, but when one had _stomach ache_, it _induces_ back pain; now, it's two in one. 'Bone exercise' requires one to stretch like a U-shaped body upwards, like bending yourself towards your back (_bending backwards_); but doing so will make one's stomach hurt more. Stomach ache requires one to bend _forward_, and doing so will hurt one's back more. Staying in the middle will hurt both. There's no way to relieve the pain, alas, w/o the use of medication. Usually, one'll just tough it out, believing in the side effects of medication; unless it got to bad one started vomiting, then one'll take medication. 

Medical science tend to focus on saving your lifes but not your pain, because they believed pain won't kill; **but that's not true** -- pain kills! At the best, you end your own life when you think your pain is too much to bear. At the worst, one don't know! **Chronic pain** are the ones that makes life more difficult, lose motivation to continue living on Earth, and jump off the top of where you live, or cut yourself in the arteries, when death is preferable to suffering. **Pain don't get worse with age**: it rise and peaks in our 50s and 60s, and fall off later (so, a 'bell-shaped' curve [2]). And yes, pain affects emotions and mood, if you don't already know. [Check out this questionnaire by McGill on Pain!](https://www.sralab.org/sites/default/files/2017-07/McGill%20Pain%20Questionnaire%20%281%29.pdf)

We don't experience pain the same way. Daniel Kahneman used to perform an experiment of colonoscope, one having intense pain level then died off immediately, another having intense pain level, but drop it to a lower pain level and extend it for a longer period; such that the latter you'll experience more total pain (if pain can be quantify) than the first. Which one is more preferable? The second, people replies. Even though you feel more pain, **you only remember the last part of the pain**, so the latter, you remember the 'lower pain', while the former, the 'intense pain' part. It has nothing to do with 'total pain' -- your brain forgot about that. 

For the medicines to relieve pain, read the book. The most useful way to relieve pain is to **distract** -- when you get so immersed in doing something else so enjoyable, your brain naturally forgets to pick up such signals. Of course, when pain is felt, it's much harder to get to that 'flow' state in the beginning than one that feels neutral. 

Doctors might fear revoking some drugs that you're taking for fear they're being blamed on if something happens to you, even though you might not need the drug anymore, only 'taking for fun'. Plus, you know that some drugs can't be taken with others? Well, for people who take more than 2 drugs at the same time, you're at danger. Researchers only tested interactions between 2 drugs, whether they cause problems with each other or not. They seldom, or never, tested with 3 or more drugs; so such interactions inside your body, if you do take 3 or more drugs simultaneously, are unknown. Will it kill you? They don't know, not until you become the role model for human experiment subject. Thing is, they cannot test more than 2, due to the total combinations of drugs -- it'll take thousands of years if they're to do that, rather than the 10+ years of drug development we have right now. 

We all die. But what do we want those final years to look like? And that's not just for our body (physical), but also for our mind (mental). It all comes down to **diet, movement, and sleep.** But before that, let's touch into circadian rhythm. 

**Circadian rhythm** is the master clock inside you that determines what you do at what time. As usual, one'll skip the biological details, which one refers you to the book, let's discuss something useful to us. **Blue light** is necessary to program the biological clock. We too often associated blue lights with light from screens, but that's not the only source emitting blue light. Believe it or not, **our wall lights have blue lights**, especially if you installed the white ones. If you installed one that emits yellow/orange light, it'd make you more sleepy, probably. For screens (and of course, only Windows and Android users, not sure for Apple/iOS), there's something called "night light" that you can turn on to make your screen yellow-orange. On my computer, one set it opened from 7 a.m. to 1 a.m. (so it turned off from 1 a.m. to 7 a.m., because one didn't manage to make it turn on 24 hours a day), and of course, one put the "intensity" (which is a slider that allows you to choose how orange you want your screen to be) to 55, which isn't too bad. One assumes the intensity means how much blue lights is 'blocked'? Like 55 may means 100-55 = 45% of the usual blue light intensity? Anyways, apart from that, make your screen as dark as possible (turn it to 0 first, then from there, turn it on until your eyes don't need to stretch to see the screen). If you're too used to bright screen like one used to 10 years ago, it'll take some time to get used to dark screen; learning it from one's friend, it makes one able to stay with the screen longer, because it doesn't strain one's eyes. Some screen allow you to turn to total darkness at 0 brightness; while other screen (which one hates) is still too bright at 0 brightness for one. And yes, on Android, it's also the same thing with night light; perhaps depending on your android version and the UI OS of your mobile. 

Melatonin is what makes you feel sleepy. The best way to make it produce sufficiently at night is to not turn on any lights. Of course, we might want to read books during the night from a printed out (if you prefer to pirate, or if the book is no longer on sale and can be get online from gutenberg, for example) or paper book (if you prefer to buy), rather than on screen (no Kindle or tablets, please). When you accidentally see blue lights, melatonin quickly reduced, and it'll take another half an hour to an hour before production reached such level of sleepiness again. So, avoid blue light at all cost. 

The time-of-day affects performance and alertness with stark difference. Its much better to **make important decisions before noon** (i.e. really, the first 4-6 hours after you wake up). If you're going to exercise, do it **earlier in the day when you're sharper.** If your circadian rhythm is disrupted and you don't know why, beware... you might be getting Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, or Huntington's, or other diseases (chronic inflammation, cancer). Repeatedly disturbing our circadian rhythm ensures you live less. 

Traveling, especially to those with time zone difference (jet lag), are extreme disturbance of our clocks. Do it when you're young, when you still can adjust; traveling intercontinentally when you're old prove to make you restless, at least in the duration of your travel.[3]

Eating within 2 hours of bedtime can decouple the central circadian rhythm. It can fail you. There's a sleep paralysis disease that we don't know why it happens (some cited eating too much as a cause, but others cite because of stress or whatsoever) that can cause death.[4] To promote sleep, some injest melatonin pills; others use sleep therapy. As for caffeine, there's no exact science how it interferes with the clock; though we know its effect to detriment sleep by delaying it, reduce it, and impair its efficiency and quality. 

And remember some say they're 'morning bird' and others say they're 'night owl'? There's also a 3rd type which is none (and one think one is considered this), which we can choose to be which by practicing in that period and force it to us. 

And for diet, there's no one best diet. First, scientists changed their view on what's the best diet every decade (more or less). Second, a diet that worked for one might not work for many others. So, there's no such thing as a best diet, only a **suitable diet**. In the end, pay more attention to what you're eating -- junk foods certainly is bad; while some people can take vegan, others cannot, not because of the requirement of meat to make it more tasty, but because their body cannot. **The teaching "If someone else can, one can" don't apply here -- you should be very careful.** Some influencers (YouTubers, etc.) that said the thing works for them are no substitute for actual scientific proofs; and even then, you should make sure the scientific research is legit. Some did research for company, had a profit motive, tweak the results such that it fits whatever the seller of the product wants. The most popular for this is milk is good for you. Actually, there's no evidence it's good for you. And worse, someone with financial motives used to say vaccination is harmful to you; it makes people scared, whoever lived in that era when the paper was published; and later claims that made the researcher go to jail, and republished to say that it's false, didn't register. **That's why a lot of older people nowadays still scared of vaccine, lingering in the fear of that fake paper being published.** 

Skip antioxidants -- read it yourself. Let's go to fats: we had **NO association** found where consumption of saturated fats linked with heart disease. I.e. eating more saturated fats don't necessarily cause heart disease. Though, we know that _trans fat_ are the ones that's bad. One used to read one video by someone who claims they're a doctor, that says vegetable fats are cancerous, and you should go on paleo diet. As one mentioned earlier, the diet that works for him don't necessarily works for you. Second, no scientific proof have been gathered where vegetable fats cause cancer. Though, some oil are better for you, like those that attenuate inflammation and coronary thrombosis -- which are oily fish (**NOT the fish-oil pill**), and extra-virgin olive oil, and vegetables. 

One used to read a book by another doctor just 2 years ago about caloric restriction and fastings that lead to good health. So, sure, one do fastings (because one can't the former, living in constant hunger) once a week. And now he tell me caloric restriction isn't yet proven; the thing is, the person who coined the term died; and second, since he coined the term, it'd been too short a period to had a longitudinal scientific research to prove that it works. On the other hand, fastings exist independently among traditional human societies, from the East to the West, all over the world. The initial rituals for fasting might be because there wasn't enough food in the past, or for some other reasons that had to do with supernatural beings (including Gods); but since it had exist for a long time, we might assume they'd been a role to play, and we should fast as well! One don't know if it'll work, but what's the worse thing that can happen? Hunger, that is. At worse, even if it don't lengthen your life, if you fast once a work, you can remember and be gratitude that whatever food you got don't come easy. And that's the spirit. And of course, try not to eat when you're not feeling hungry. One had to say, one's guilty of this, chomping down chips (that don't make one less hungry) just because they taste nice. 

Protein, you need **0.54 gram per pound you weigh per day**. That's about **1.19 gram per kg per day**, converted. If you weigh 57kg, you'll need 68 grams of protein. The contents of protein estimates as follow: 
- 1 cup of non-fat milk = 0.3 ounces of protein (8.5 grams)
- 2 medium eggs = 0.4 ounces (11.4 g)
- 0.5 pounds (227 g) of salmon = 1.7 ounces (48.2 g)

No, don't overeat salmon -- remember the mercury earlier? Overdo it and you'll get mercury poisoning. **Eating too much protein can develop leucine toxicity** (a poison). Lack of protein can cause serious problems with brain, muscles, and immune system. 

And yes, if you heard the myth that says drinking too much soy products can interfere with male and/or female hormones[5], the research is **based on flawed data.** The current thinking (as of book writing) is that you can drink moderate amount of soy except for those allergic to it. (Again, no overdrinking, hence 'moderate'.)

Dehydration is a serious problem. The worse thing is, you may not feel like you're dehydrated when you actually is. ORS solution can help -- though they're usually not tasting nice. There are other non-ORS solutions out there like 100 plus (manufactured by Malaysia, one think) that taste nice, but they're not ORS -- they're just for 'drink after you exercise' thingy, perhaps replacing loss of salt and sugar (energy). Don't drink alcohol. Avoid bread or dried fruit that sucks water out of you! 

Constipation is another problem which one don't want to touch into. One also had constipation, and the solution that worked for one and one's mom is to eat wheat at night instead of rice. (Eastern people plant rice, while Westeners wheat). Ever since then, the only problem one had is the stool is too deep inside, don't want to come out. The old problems of passing hard stools no longer exist. And yes, those stool too deep that don't want to come out usually, when they reached the top of the dam, will come out all at once, filling the toilet bowl 'flat' (as in how deep is the water in your toilet bowl, it fills to that depth) at least once, and the cycle repeats. 

There's also stuffs about probiotics and bacteria in the gut. How to change that, one don't know. But author says, the bacteria composition in your gut is as unique as your fingerprint! And yes, it depends on the environment you grow up, the food you eat, the stress you experience, the genes you're given, etc. And even in adults, they may be changeable. The thing with probiotics like yogurt is, the bacteria present in the yogurt, upon reaching your gut, may not be able to successfully fight for survival against the local population already there, hence they died even before they do their job. And stomach is highly acidic -- those that can survive in your yogurt cannot be sure to survive in your stomach. Misbalanced of gut microbiome can cause disease like obesity and cancer. 

The average American today eat too little fiber -- we need more. Second, don't be too scared of sugar. MSG and the like are scary, for they're ultra-processed, but sugar itself? Not like our ancestors don't ingest them at a healthy level. Diet don't work, because it leaves you craving for food, and you end up eating more. 
1. Try to eat when you're hungry. 
2. Try to stop eating when you're no longer hungry. 
3. Learn to cope with emotions in alternative forms, other than binge eating, and 
4. Place no restriction on types of food you're eating unless for medical reasons. 

Superfoods like blueberries and kiwis etc. had problems -- not to say they're not useful, but they're not useful _per se_. Don't forget about balancing what you eat! You can't solve a problem without introducing another! Yes, the key is not to eat junk/processed food, or food too high in sugar, salt, red meat. "Eat food, not too much, mostly plants."

Humans shouldn't be sedentary, but what about Stephen Hawking and Jean-Dominique Bauby? Well, if you have an entire staff group to keep you alive for an extended period... Exercise is good for 2 reasons. First, it oxygenates the blood. Then, our brain needs to do 'problem solving'. Running on a treadmill only satisfies the first, not the second. To satisfy the 2nd, you should walk on a road that's full of obstacles (twigs, roots, branches, rocks), and that's not flat but with holes and protruding soil. 

Aging is irreversible, but the _effects_ of aging is somewhat reversible. **Physical activity is not the same as exercise.** It's moving around, interacting with the environment, and don't have to be extreme. Our brain can form new connections; to train, we need to engage in the real world. Before learning something new, engage in **aerobic exercise**. If you're busy, try HIIT (High-Intensity Interval Training). That's getting your heart rate up to 90-95% of your maximum -- meaning, by the time you're doing this, you should be not able to speak, though you still can continue doing the activity. That's the intensity to aim for. Of course, if you're too old for that, moderate exercise works too. Please, don't break your bones! 

Some people, especially older people, may sleep less; you probably heard that -- around 5-6 hours of sleep. However, research suggests that it's not that they _can_ sleep less, but that, due to their less effective body from aging, they're _unable_ to sleep for longer than that. In fact, it actually affects them tremendously, their bad nights. Older adults do in fact need to sleep 7-8 hours. Too little sleep and you're sleep deprived. Too much sleep, as like overdrinking water, can increase risk of disease too! **Don't underestimate oversleeping.** Our brain has toxins build up while we're awake; unfortunately, we're not like fish, which can sleep one side of their brain while having the other side awake. And of course, when we're awake, our body had not evolved the mechanism to clean out the toxin awake -- it'll only be able to do so when we're asleep. No, coffee and tea don't help -- they merely made you worse in the long run, postponing your awakness time a little longer, but not solve the underlying problem. 

When we sleep, our brain paralyze our body; some people's brain don't paralyze their body, that's why they **sleep walk.** What they did in their dreams, it reflected in the real world. That's sleep-walking. 

If you're not having a good sleep previously, or you're just plain tired, you may want to catch some rest during the (early) afternoon. That's OK, but **try limiting it to within 20 mins**, for longer time proved to make you more sleepy than refreshed. Also, we mentioned oversleeping; but we haven't mention that some people, esp. college students nowadays (and perhaps adults, but one don't know, never heard from them before talking about such habits, but that doesn't mean it doesn't exist), tend to stay awake for a day or two to meet the target for their exam, lingering in the study hall; then, after getting too tired without more than 24 or even 48 hours of sleep, went home and slept for more than 12 hours. That is **very unhealthy**, often fueled by drugs, alcohol, and caffeine. 

Some other problems with sleep includes menopause (in both women and men, although in men, it's called 'andropause', where less sperms are being produced after such, though unlike women, men don't totally lose their reproductivity, only much less likely by having much less sperms). Of course, the problem with such are a decrease on estrogen and testosterone, and they may affect sleep in some people, not in others. 

The sleep hygiene that author suggests? **Go to bed at the same time every night, and wake up at the same time every morning, INCLUDING ON WEEKENDS!!!** Even a slight change of schedule (esp. noticeable after age 65 or so) can affect your memory, alertness, and immune system for **_days_**. 
1. Start getting ready for bed about 2 hours before sleep time. Stop using screens emitting blue light (and better, your wall lamp also changed to yellow/orange). Do something that helps one relax (reading a book, etc). 
2. Ensure the room one sleep in is completely dark. Make sure curtains block out any light from outside; and make sure you cover any device that emit lights. Also, your phone should be on silent mode, and you should turn off WiFi ('do not disturb' mode) so any messages won't vibrate the phone at night.[6]
3. Sleep in a cool room if possible. 
4. Keep your sleep and wake cycle synchronized properly by getting sunlight in the morning -- even on cloudy day. If no sunlight, use a blue-light lamp for 15-30 mins, if you bought one. 
5. Write in a journal before bedtime. It helps one to relax and can improve memory. And anything that you want to do the next morning, write them down than worry you'll forget about them throughout the night. A quick to-do list. 
6. Don't rely on sleeping pills for more than one/two nights. They induce less productive and less restorative sleeps. 
7. Go to bed at the same time every night, and wake up the same time every morning. If you slept late one night, you still have to wake up the same time next morning. In the short run, **the consistency of your cycle is more important than the amount of sleep.** 

Playing computer games won't save us from Alzheimer's. 

Some animals don't die. Well, at least, their risk of catching disease as they age are constant. Say simply, for us, after we reach certain age, the risk of us getting a certain disease increase as we age; but for them, the risk stayed the same. That's why, if they're lucky enough, they can live for a really long time. One of them is the lobster. Alas, they usually die from predators like in seafood restaurants. And of course, if left alone, they grow till they need to shed shells; and such process are dangerous, so dangerous it caused a lot of deaths (not sure the percentage) during the process. 

We heard about the blue zone: Nicoya, Costa Rica; Sardinia, Italy; Ikaria, Greece; Okinawa, Japan. These are places where lots of people lives to their centenarians. But alas, not all of them. We can't really know why. Most people engage in the positive life factors, but not all live to such age. And even with the higher percentage of centenarians, the 'percentage' is still very small: less than 1%. Theyre just higher relative to the world's average, and most part of the world. 

Oh yeah, **castrated men tend to live an average of 14 years longer than uncastrated.** One don't know how they measure that; but the earlier you castrate, particularly before you start producing sperms, the longer you can live, even up to 20 years! Perhaps that's why reptiles that cooled their reproductive urges tend to live much longer than their like??? Like turtles living to very long age. (But this has no scientific backup, just one asking a question out of curiosity). 

You may have heard about telomeres before, and about them getting shorter and shorter every generation. Reaching some limit, they can no longer split. Well, not actually no longer split, but they split into incomplete copy, making them disease-prone. But we can't say it's the **cause** of trouble. Actually, if you have longer telomeres that allow your cells to split for more times, it increases your chance of preserving a cancerous cells. Author hypothesized that such Goldilock zone telomere length might be to prevent such cancerous changes. You know, even if you still have telomere count low, your cells can actually mutate and preserve such mutation. And yes, not all your cell reach the limit at the same time: we have so many cells that they stop dividing at different times, so when one cells stop dividing, we don't die immediately. Chronic stress can artificially shorten telomere; and shorter telomere people (born with or artificially shortening it) does indeed die younger than people with average telomere. That's not a _causation_, but a _correlation_. **Living in pain can shorten telomere!!!** So, don't underestimate pain! 

There's another cell called 'senescent' cells. When our healthy cells are going cancerous, our body detected it beforehand, and made it senescent. They're also called "zombie" cells, because they don't get recycled from the body, staying there forever. And if your whole body is senescent, you lose control of that part, for they no longer works. And worse, because our body don't recycle them, and our tech cannot yet recycle them manually (no, we don't have nanobots yet, nor does medicine that kills senescent cells passed the safety test yet), we live with them till we age. In aged person, these senescent cells are visible as features: wrinkles, for example. 

> _For every complex problem, there's a simple solution, and it's wrong._

**We really don't know how to extend health span or lifespan with any certainty.** Jeanne Calment, whom lived to age 122, smoked till age 117; and smoking is bad for health! You may be practicing healthy lifestyle but died of some heart attacks. There's just no confirmation. So, lighten up, enjoy life. Read Seneca's "On the Shortness of Life". 

One remember one used to play brain-training games. Unfortunately, Lumosity later suffered large charges due to such claims. One didn't know till now that author mentioned it; but one at last did stop playing because one can't keep at it when one was younger. You'd to look at the screen, where the birds gonna flash on, and you had to click on it where it last appeared. The problem with such 'brain-training' is they only worked on that scenario, the training is non-transferable. On the other hand, something that's transferable is such as exploring new locations around your neighborhood, make new friends and communicating with (old/new) friends. They're much better choices. 

Plus, author touched on the ethical issues of brain-enhancing drugs. Like steroids, can we still classify them as huma, or superhuman? Steroids in competitions can be taken if you can show you're taking it for specific purposes as medication, not when you have a healthy body and take it to enhance yourself. Author listed a list of stuffs in Chapter 13, and you'd want to read it for yourself than letting one introduce it to you. 

Midlife crisis because we're lousy forecasters: we expect much more than we can get. Then, happiness and well-being rise again, on average, to the end, as we can forecast more accurately as we became wiser, not to expect too much. Of course, some people, esp. those stuck in bad marriages and suppressed their emotions by keep climbing the corporate ladder, their well-being and happiness stay low once it reached the lowest point, never climbing again till they die, and they never understand, never grow. Others that understood it early might never have a dip; they're too lucky to born with. At least, one isn't that lucky, and one had one's dip not even in midlife, but in teens! And yes, it stretched till now; for the struggle never ends. Though one's more grateful, one strives for more; and whether one can or cannot achieve it, at least one tried and took the effort to try. 

> **_"The only thing that really matters in life are your relationships to other people... Really just being together. Share each other's lives and our children's lives. Snuggle on cold nights."_**

Someone whom married a 2nd time are often just as happy as those who stayed in their 1st marriage. Marriage fails for a variety of reasons, and the most common one is they realized they're not a fit latter as they deepen on each other. For many, marriages get better and better in old age. 

> **_"Life shrinks or expands in proportion to one's courage."_** That the one who comes to teach learns the keenest of lessons, while those who come to learn learns nothing. 

You want a family doctor because context matters. Some disease take years to manifest itself; and someone who knows you, knows your family history, knows your personality, your habits, your hobbies, can predict those diseases and take early interventions. 

As we get older, we should start thinking about who'll take care of us. And, how do we want to age? Alone or in a socially-adhesive community? And who'll come to our aid when we need it, and even when we don't need it, as a surprise? How do one want to spend one's old days? Talk these with your children and arrange for it. They're not yours to bear alone. Well, if you have children. If you don't have, it's scary to think of who can help you 'sweep your ashes' after you die. Usually, in the old days, neighbors are the ones that'll help out, for those without children. And if no neighbors, they're leave to die, one guessed, and you may see bones sitting on a chair or lying on a bed if one comes to visit you centuries later in a dilapidated house. Nowadays, the latter seems more probable than the former, esp. if you didn't manage to get to the hospital before you're gone forever; and now that neighbors probably don't even know each other, don't care about each other, because it's typical to "care your own business" in this modern world. Unless, of course, unless. 

"It's better to burn out than it is to rust... rust never sleeps." One of author's friends grandma, whom died at 113, spoke; she died while milking her cow. 

And don't forget to laugh. Whatever's going on around you, **remember to laugh.** 



The book by itself is too big to remember everything. It's useful to refer back then and often, provided it'd not been obsolete (if it does, update your notes from online new researches), so we remember them. 

> Also, as an advertisement, [check out the book on Xenoblade 3 one'd finished transcribing not long ago!](https://wabinab.github.io/Xenoblade-Chronicles-3-The-Book/)

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 

### Notes and Footnotes: 
[1] Without going into the specifics like "neurology". 
[2] Anything you don't know, Google, yeah! Click on Wikipedia and read the 'abstract' (which is the part before any sections). That'll be enough for layman. If there're not, open up Microsoft Bing (sorry, Apple users, one never uses Apple so one don't know how) and click on the Copilot icon that looks like blue-green-yellow ribbon strip on the top, and red-pink-orange ribbon strip on the bottom, and paste the link there and ask it to "summarize for someone whom only had primary school education (i.e. yr-6 grades equivalent in the US) in, maximum 300 words."
[3] One assumes it's less than or about a week; usually, only very rich people travel longer than that (for every day living non-homeless is a burden); and usually, you'll need to make another visa if you're in the country for more than 2 weeks. That's as far as one knows, from the limitations of one's passports. 
[4] Thing with this, it only happens to Southeast Asian people. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5v279Mhqpow
[5] For one's myth, it's male. They say one'll become more girlish (like eunuch) drinking more soil. 
[6] Old phones where your battery can pluck off, even while shut down, they turn on every 10 mins or so to check for new messages, hence allow,say, FBI to track GPS location every 10 mins or so when it awake. Clever bandits will know to pull off the battery. Nowadays, your battery are integrated, and one don't know if it does that or not. But for my Redmi phone, one ensure that one's phone is shut down the previous night, but the next day, my alarm rang. Seems like the alarm feature is either encoded to start back up the phone, or my phone start up every _n_ minutes to check for possible alarms. And yes, of course, if government want to know your privacy and installed some backdoor in your phone, there's no way you could prevent them from knowing it. That means eavesdropping could happen while your phone is turned off, if you put them near where you're having conversations instead of inside a vacuum sound-blocking (and light-blocking) box. 