# The Power of Strangers by Joe Keohane
afterthought strangers friends

When you get out of school (usually after college), you'd find it's not as easy as you thought to make new friends! In fact, you might not make a friend in a decade! Gone are the good old school years where everyone mingle around, not worrying about climbing the corporate ladders, and can immerse oneself in the same activity as others -- a good way to make new friends with previously strangers. Co-curriculum activities (CCA) (in the UK, they called it clubs and societies) are especially helpful. Not to say they're all helpful; one used to join Kung Fu club which, they do meet by going to the bar after, but one found it difficult to connect with others, particularly because they're all connected to each other beforehand, and one felt oneself unwelcomed, just because no one really wants to converse with one. On the other hand, the Hiking Club was fantastic! Not to say it's assured, but it's easier to find one-to-one situation where each of you could focus on each other and speak to each other. One didn't went to the trip for Kung Fu, alas, due to Covid strike at the wrong timing; but, joining a year earlier, one went to the Hiking trip, and it was quite nice! Despite not making lifelong friends, even just having to talk to different people gets one motivated and felt safe and cuddled (not literally but yeah). 

> Before you continue, make sure you read the book **before** reading my commentary. Otherwise, **it'll distort** your reading. You'll only consider one's point, but failed to consider other equally important points by the author. **This warning applies to ALL COMMENTARIES**, critical or not of the book. Furthermore, most people don't even understand what they read, they just speak their mind without understanding, nor _respecting_ the book (myself included). 

And of course, after some Sergeant (one forgot his name) coined the term "loneliness epidemic", people started to look at it more seriously. To be honest, we don't have past data to make proper comparison: is the percentage today really that bad, compare to the past? We don't know. We have an estimated percentage today, but of the past? No data. Not that one could find, at least, because no psychologist was going to focus on something that wasn't the problem. Like, bro, if there wasn't the loneliness epidemic coined, we won't even try to gather data in the field to determine how bad it is. We would just let it pass by unnoticed; and that's what we did up till very recently; hence that's why we don't have past data. (Or maybe there are some weird psychologists who take data but one can't find.) And if your friends are all climbing ladders and you are sitting there, wondering if anyone would come and speak to you, and that you can't call your friends because all they would say is, "busy", who can you rely on? You're no longer in college, can't randomly go make new friends in that relatively 'safe haven'. So where? That's why we talk to strangers. 

The thing is, talking to strangers isn't that easy. There are lots of stuffs that prevented us from talking to strangers. First, they don't always seem friendly and welcoming. People are looking down on their phones, minding their own businesses all day long; and disrupting them, you might feel you're offending them. Or it's the culture that prevents you front speaking to your fellow neighbors, people around you. To do so is to violate something, make yourself weird and standing out. Plus, remember Papa Mama whom told us kids of stranger danger? (Well, if you're kids by then, or maybe you're the parent who did, and still do, the telling?) No wonder we don't want to talk to strangers. As in everyone around you are hostile. So, answer one, if they are, why would you bother going to the supermarket? Why would you put yourself so close to the cashier at the checkout point? Why would you allow other shoppers to pass by you without you noticing them, still trying to pick the best product on the shelf? If they're really so dangerous, wouldn't you be careful, just in case they take out a knife and stabbed you in the back while your attention is on something else? Yes, security can come; but by the time police and securities arrived, how many stabs would you have suffered before the guy/gal gets arrested? And are you sure you can survive before blood emptied from your limited-liquid body, splattered on the floor? 

It just makes no sense. If everyone really is hostile, we should have seen such incidents in the billions! But no, one even wonder if it reaches the tens. Stealing products from the shelf sounds more probable than killing some shoppers. Plus, what advantage would they get for killing some other people, except, if they love blood, like vampires? And let's invert it for a while. Ask, why, in the eyes of some other shoppers, you're not the vampire that has a possibility of stabbing them in the back? You'd say you're a good person. But why do you think they're not? Ask them, do they think you're a good person? And they'd be wary that you're not; just like you'd be wary that they're not. After all, stranger danger isn't just _you_ thinking of _them_ as strangers, but also _them_ thinking of _you_ as stranger. It couldn't be more true. 

Not to say that it won't happen, but the probability? The next time you have a common cold, pray to god you're not the 0.1% that died of common cold. Yes, common cold that cause common fever can lead to death, and given how many people suffer from common cold, and for how long common cold existed, in 2020 when Covid was still at a peak, it's concluded that it caused more death than Covid. Yet, we make a hassle out of covid but not common cold, thinking they don't kill when they in fact do. 

Enough of such bloodlust, one hope that one convinced you that strangers aren't all that dangerous. Newspaper only reported the eyeball-catching news, not the tranquil scenes; you'd suffered from availability bias if you say, "No, look at what's in the news!" One'd say, "No, LOOK AROUND YOU!!!"

People like to be listened to. But how do we approach people and get them open up? Or at least, how do we get started talking about the weather? Now that 'how' is what's in the book, which one would refer you to read it beforehand, if you haven't already. But one do want to highlight one thing -- how do we know that the other person is interested in you? You'd have to try, and learn and practice how to read emotions, esp. body languages. You could start off with, like, "Hi, I'm wabinab." and see where that goes. Read the emotion whether they accept/reject you; the latter, the most obvious is they get back to do their own things after one try or two, like continue looking at their phone rather than putting their phone back into their pocket and engage with you. Or, if you're walking, try to look at others in the eyes and smile (naturally) when you're some distance away. Of course, some people would look down at the floor; other people would quickly look away, and some would look back at you and smile; then you could say, "Good morning!" and they might return so. No need to go in depth yet, when you're starting out, just like one's currently starting out. Plus, if you're walking one way and they're walking the other, it's quite obvious that you can't talk longer than "Good morning." For to talk longer requires sitting down or walking in the same direction, no? 

Reading for emotions is hard. In fact, one learnt it; it doesn't come naturally to one. Similarly, one used to ask one's friends when one was in high school, "How do you make friends with others?" and they were dumbfounded. They were like, "Just like this!" But asked to clarify what _this_ is, they can't say. In fact, they can't put it into words! They did it out of subconscious, unconsciously; unlike one, whom need to consciously put effort into making friends. Back to strangers, learning to read the clouds, the emotions, aren't easy. Sometimes, you might get mistaken. For one, which one had trained to have a slightly ticker face skin, one would ask if they would like to engage more, explicitly; because one knows one can't read implicit emotions easily, so on excuse oneself on that, doesn't matter how others think about it. But anyways, author said that, it's easier and more enjoyable to talk to strangers than we think. Yeah, provided they're not currently addicted to some Chinese Novels sitting on the train, or like in most UK long-distance train, immediately go to sleep for whatever reasons (ahem ahem, who go to sleep at 4am?) which clearly don't want you to wake them; you might try engaging. And yeah, internet had been a giant roadblock against speaking in real life, because it had developed an attention economy that designed to grab your attention. [1] It just makes speaking to each other less preferable. What, some people had so rusty their social skills they felt nervous, shaking, fear, when trying to call the pizza guy to order. And you know what? That's why the pizza company at one's country developed an 'order online' form where you can submit! Makes life easier, but one thought that makes social interactions harder. 

When you want to talk to someone but you're not the one whom go out of your way to find them, it's not going to work. Yeah, you can go to a pub; but people brought others to the pub with them. And you know what? If you just sit there on the table yourself, most people will just ignore you and get another table; unless they're there to deliberately find new friends, just like you; and that's not even possible if they're too shy to approach you, due to the **fear of rejection.** And also the **fear of success:** if they manage to sit by you, what can you guys speak about? What do you guys start with? Awkward pause? Well, to know how to do this, read more in the book! One'll skip the spoilers.

> **When you're in public, you should expect someone to walk into your bubble.** Expecting otherwise and you're crazy. Why? Everyone shares the public space, and it's not declared yours. Unless they started touching you pervertedly, getting near you, to pass by you, or to talk to you, is expected. 

"_Having a negative experience in life shouldn't stop us from going out there and try again._" "Your life changes tremendously, _and it'll come with incredible pain_." **As for kids, don't engage with strangers who come to ask for help, or touches them,** but they don't need to shy away from talking to strangers a safe distance away. 

Small talks are especially useful to start the conversation; then break the script. They're used to find what both of you agrees to talk about, not to dwell on it. Or, you can use a **pre-frame**, like "I know we're not supposed to talk to people on the subway, but..." and you add what you feel curious about, like "I really like your hat." Then, follow with a justification, like, "I just lost mine, and I've been looking for a new pair. Any suggestions? Specifications? Stores? Size? Prices?" If people are confused, just _repeat what we said, more clearly._ If people responded with annoyance/hostility, that's their problem, not ours, so just leave it. If people seem **defensive/scared, one must've misread the situation -- so, _apologize and disengage_.** And only this is rejection. The annoyance/hostility is their problem, not rejecting you. Otherwise, people might be neutral to talk. 

Something especially noteworthy is Theodore Zeldin's Feasts of Strangers, which gathered strangers together and talk to each other over a set of menu (which isn't about food, but about questions to get you started asking about each other, if you don't know already what to talk about). And also his concept of 'individuals': where he said that groups are of the past; today, know the individuals one-to-one. Now that fits into one's biases, don't it? Because one can't do group well, one naturally agrees with him. 

And of course, the book also have a chapter about, what if the strangers you encoutered are naturally your enemy? Not to say that kind of enemy where you just kill immediately upon seeing, but someone where you won't want to stay close to. For example, of 2 separate parties, like Republican vs Democrats, or Red Sox vs Yankees, or some other football fans in the UK (Manchester United vs something else one forgot because people around me mostly talk the former and almost none of the latter when one heard it), etc. Yeah, there's a chapter where it allows people to sit down and talk to the opposite, by first recognize that people in the opposite are people and aren't ruts or barbarians, that they are of equal mind, just as complicated as you and one, and not some lesser minds. Then, recognizing the individuals, only can we start talking about the sensitive subject, understand each other standpoint, even why each other get to hate each other? What did they generalized from? What event(s) caused them to hate each other? Or perhaps, had they inherited the hatred from their family, never thought about it themselves, and just asked to hate or they'll be abandoned (so, fear of abandonment)? 

Not to say there are no difficulty talking past strangers. Sometimes, unpolished languages also acts as a barrier to speak fluently. Anyhow, when situation permits, the more you practice, not only does the language you don't speak so smoothly gets better, but your skills with strangers also gets better. Of course, you could start off easy by getting to strangers whom speak the language you can speak, or you at least can listen (with bare minimum speaking) on the language that they can speak well but you not so well. That'd do a favor. 

And lastly, just read the book to know more. 5 out of 5 it is. 

> Also, as an advertisement, [check out the book on Xenoblade 3 one'd finished transcribing not long ago!](https://wabinab.github.io/Xenoblade-Chronicles-3-The-Book/)

[Find me at Upwork and propose any writing/programming work by sending one a message!](https://www.upwork.com/freelancers/~011a1c60f09fff5f90?mp_source=share). 

## Notes:
[1] One used to play a game; or actually the new MMORPG games today, they're designed such that, everyday, you're given a target to finish, and that target resets everyday. Quite boring, yeah, but because we're so OCD about getting things tick off checklist, they utilize such 'checklists' to make us crave; and make a dozens of those checklist and you'd understand how many hours a day you'd spent in the games just to complete such checklists. And worse, there was one game, one forgot the name, that have "Alliance Duel" every week until the end of game when they close down that server. It says, monday, you have to do this; and if you're in the strongest alliance, they might kick you out if you're not online for 16-24 hours, making attention economy even worse, by pressuring you to be competitive. On the other hand, joining an enjoyable guild, you can play for the first 2-3 weeks, before the giant guild started targeting your guild and you'd found you'd been looted several dozens time and there's nowhere to hide on the map. It's getting worse. 